Question and Answer Operator [Operator Instructions] Your first question comes from the line of Andy Kaplowitz of Barclays. Andrew Alec Kaplowitz Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division Could you talk a little bit more about your visibility in North America for the rest of the year? And particularly in high-horsepower tractors, what do you think the risk is of order cancellation? Have you seen any? And what do you think of the risk is going forward? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO I think we have a very good visibility in all risk, and opportunities are included in the numbers we just discussed. Andrew Alec Kaplowitz Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division Okay. So -- and you're not really seeing anything so far. You're just kind of watching and learn. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Exactly. Andrew Alec Kaplowitz Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division Okay, that's helpful. And then could you talk about the incrementals in North America? They were very strong in the quarter, obviously. You talked a little bit about cost control. We know you're starting a new facility or you did start a new facility in North America. Is that all contributing to better performance in North America? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO In North America, a number of factors influencing the results. Clearly, the GSI acquisition, which is our -- the performance is strongest seasonally in the second quarter, was a key driver of the improvement. But also underlying that, we mentioned that our operating margins, excluding GSI, would have been about 10%. And so we're seeing in the core business, great improvement as well. I think a lot of the factors there are the key increases in some of our most profitable products like high-horsepower tractors, sprayers and hay equipment were driving that improvement. Andrew Alec Kaplowitz Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division And just one more follow-up on that. Could I ask you about GSI in the context of -- I mean, you did $0.39 so far for the year. I know that 4Q is usually -- I mean, you talked about it maybe being dilutive. But $0.06 seems a bit conservative. Is it just because you're watching North America so closely? Or -- and how does the international strength offset that? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Yes. We're -- what we're seeing right now is some softness in the North America market. But we have been able to offset that with better-than-expected results in our international sales. So we've been very pleased with the growth that we have achieved there. As you said, what we see seasonally from GSI is the first half is much better than the second half, and the fourth quarter is dilutive. So we're comfortable with that $0.45 per share guidance that we're giving. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO And we want to be conservative also. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Ann Duignan of JPMorgan. Ann P. Duignan JP Morgan Chase & Co, Research Division I appreciate the emphasis on the monitoring of the situation, given the drought for 2012. But Martin, could you talk a little bit about where you might anticipate the impact being for your business? I worry about GSI, given that it's both protein production and grain storage, neither of which are likely to be in very healthy conditions by the end of the year versus your livestock business on the tractor side. Which businesses are you monitoring most closely to get a sense of where the impact might be and how quickly it might show up? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Yes. One is, we are very sorry for the farmers who suffer from the drought. But as you can imagine with our footprint, this is such only a small portion of our business. Most of AGCO's customers benefit very much from the much higher commodity prices. And that's a very strong year because prices go up and on the other hand, also, input prices go down. So they will generate excellent profits this year. We are seeing some problems in rather smaller markets for us like Italy and Spain. This is where some of the local manufacturing companies like Landini and Sami [ph] might be hit, but we are -- they are pretty much in the sector of high-horsepower tractors. And in Europe, I think any problem one might think about in those part of Europe will be offset by a stronger growth in Russia and Eastern Europe. In the -- the situation in GSI, we very strongly monitor GSI, of course, because it's a new acquisition. And so we want to make sure that we understand the business. What we see is that the synergies in the international markets are much bigger than we would have expected. We have a lot of strong dealers in South America and in Europe and China and Eastern Europe, who are very interested in that business. And we see more growth in those part of the world, which offset basically the potential difficulties in the American corn belt. Ann P. Duignan JP Morgan Chase & Co, Research Division Could you just update us on your sugarcane harvester in Brazil? When will that product come to market? And should we anticipate some market share gains when you have both the tractors and combines for that segment? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO That is actually the sugarcane business we own now and we sell. That's the -- yesterday, we sold some to Africa so that means we also here have the opportunity to globalize that business a little more, and you will see the full impact of the sugarcane harvester in 2013. Operator Your next question is from the line of Rob Wertheimer of Vertical Research Partners. Robert Cameron Wertheimer Vertical Research Partners, LLC I just had a curious question on the strong high-horsepower tractors in the U.S. Is that specifically tied to a particular subregion or strategy or brand? Or can you sort of talk about how you made progress in that? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO It's a combination -- first of all, it's our strategy. Because in our portfolio, we have the best-performing, high-horsepower tractor in the world. And this is the Fendt brand, if you connect it with the brand. We basically -- the Fendt tractor, in a way, is maybe a little bit too high tech for the average American farmer. And therefore, we decided to take the most important elements, which are -- which is basically the dry strength, the transmission and the rear axle and in many cases, also our diesel engine into the Challenger brand of tractors. The Challenger is the brand, which is exclusive to our Caterpillar distribution network. And we see those big Cat dealers getting traction, investing money and focusing in this very segment. So the advantage of our tractors is they're very performing. They're very productive. They have very low cost of operating per hour, per acre. Fuel consumption is much lower than what you see typically from competitors. And our tractors have the lowest cost of ownership, all considered. Robert Cameron Wertheimer Vertical Research Partners, LLC Okay, that's helfpul. And then one follow-up, you mentioned and I think... Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO It worked almost like a commercial, wasn't it? Robert Cameron Wertheimer Vertical Research Partners, LLC It was pretty good. So you mentioned, Martin, the drought, even though it's tough on a lot of farmers, can be good on others. I assume that's mostly Europe and South America. Have you heard already positive sort of sales/order indications as generally commodity prices have been driven up? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Yes, but we don't want to talk about next year. But when you talk to dealers, customers, competitors in the various -- what I, for example, like is I like to talk to local players. Like in France, the market leader in soil preparation is a company called Tegua [ph] Bisance [ph]. So when I talk to Patrick Bisance [ph] about next year, I was basically expecting some kind of conservative statement. But they are all very positive about it. So far, what we hear from Europe and also what we hear in South America is pretty positive. And I think, without giving guidance here, I'm expecting also a great year 2013 for our industry, especially because of our strengths in Europe. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Jamie Cook of Credit Suisse. Jamie Lyn Cook Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division Two questions. One, with regards -- you took your pricing forecast modestly. Is that just still a function of more competitive pricing in Brazil? Or could you add color there? And then Martin, well, you don't want to talk about -- well, I won't ask you about 2013. Let me -- on Europe you seem, I guess, a lot more positive or you seem positive about 2013. I guess, I've been hearing from some suppliers, for example, Annexer [ph], reported this past week. They talked about a slowdown in ag, and I think they were focused more on Western Europe. There was another supplier who on the axle side, so -- I mean, within Europe is it still very much south versus north. Is there anything that you're seeing in the west -- on the northern side of Europe that's concerning you at all? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Actually, I'm not concerned about Europe. And also, when you talk to suppliers, you have to understand where are their main markets. So in axles, if we -- most probably, we talk about the same company. This is a company who does most of the business in Italy for Italian manufacturers, smaller and bigger ones. And they, of course, are then hit more. We have different concerns. We have some of our suppliers who have capacity issues, and that is also a reason why then we have some inventory problems here and there. So overall, my discussion includes, of course, suppliers. We talked to suppliers, but you need to understand where they do business and what is the nature of their business overall. You get a good picture, if you talk to tire guys, to hydraulic manufacturers and so and so. And I had, so far, not one discussion where anybody was assuming any kind of slowdown in Europe. And then I want to make also a little statement on the drought. Of course, we do business here in the open nature, so that means not everything we are doing can be 100% controlled. This is a severe drought. But of course, we have those situations also in the past. One year, it's the rain, and we have too much water. Another year, we don't have enough. So overall, of course, my assumption is not that this drought will now go on for the next 5 years. So that means, I'm not an expert, but if you just believe in statistics, then you could assume that also next year, the corn belt could come back. And what I hear from companies focused in seeding, they are very bullish about 2013, and there's no reason why to be pessimistic. Andy? Well, who wants to talk about the price? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Sure. Jamie, we did tweak our pricing. I think it went from $3.5 to -- $3 to $3.5, so 20 or 30 basis points. And actually, we think we'll get a little more pricing at, I guess, about Brazil specifically. So it's not that. It's just probably in our other markets that we're just being a little more cautious, and we haven't seen quite the level of price increases that we had expected. So it's just a slight tweak but not related to Brazil. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO And Jamie, Brazil is not more or less competitive than any other market in the world. The industry has consolidated, but it does not mean that we don't compete. I think we compete quite a bit, which is good for our customers. So they certainly don't have to pay too much for excellent products. Operator Your next question comes from Ashish Gupta of CLSA. Ashish Ravi Gupta CLSA Americas, LLC, Research Division Just if we take a step back, and I think about the long term, is it fair to say you kind of become more bullish on the next 2 to 3, 4 years for equipment demand? The higher CapEx part of that, just the lower ending stocks tend to sets up for multiple years of high production and sort of catching up with consumption. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Well, when I'm not on a call, but for example, talk to the media, my guidance is very bullish. And I mentioned that, and I'm quoted there also for the next 100 years. So -- and you know that you always talk about the important criteria -- factful criteria, which result into a high demand. So I think the demand for farm goods will also grow in the future, and we talked already several times about the growing sector. It's a growing world population, changing diets in the emerging markets, renewable energies and so on. And I can add now in the meantime that also a lot of the chemical industries try to replace crude oil derivatives by organic products. So that means, overall, I am personally very optimistic about the future of farming globally. Not to talk about certain areas of the world, where I see huge growth opportunities. And this, of course, is also true for the next, let's say, 5 years. I'm rather optimistic. And you can see that last time, during the financial crisis, our industry reacted late but reacted somewhat because, of course, farmers also sometimes act like consumers in a way and can hold back investments. And we don't see that so far and hopefully, also not in the near future. Ashish Ravi Gupta CLSA Americas, LLC, Research Division Great. And just kind of a -- more of a follow-up on GSI on your comment that you're seeing a lot of interest from your international dealers. Has your view continued to evolve on that end in terms of the long-term opportunity? Does it seem like it's going to be a bigger international opportunity in the near term? I know you talked about a 5-year outlook of about $1 billion. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Yes. I think this is an easy target how I see it. And there are certain -- let's say, when you think about why there are certain markets like China, for example, where big international many American companies invest, companies like Tyson [ph] and so on, and they basically like the idea to go in with a standard set of solutions for the farmers and for the investors. And then in the grain segment, we talked already about that in -- most, let's say, about 50% of the harvest in Russia and Africa and countries like that are lost after harvest. So everybody needs investment and compared to smaller players in our industry, now we can basically take GSI by our hand and help them to get in touch with local dealers and people who are already connected with the market and with customers. And that's a big real synergy because we don't -- GSI doesn't have to go there and hire many people. So we have already a structure in place. And with only a little investment, we basically can grow that export business substantially. And also, I think the other advantage we have, in some of those markets, we already invested in manufacturing. But in a way that -- in some areas, it's like a start-up. When we talk, for example, about China, we have plenty of space. And we can offer GSI some manufacturing space, which will not change our cost position in total sales situation in Russia and some other markets. So that means for GSI, the big advantage is that they can now have either access to those markets on a very moderate cost base. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Michael Cox of Piper Jaffray. Michael E. Cox Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division My first question is just trying to reconcile the qualitative commentary around your bullishness around 2013 versus the down year-over-year order boards at the end of June. Should I take that to mean that you're expecting orders to recover as we move closer to harvest in the northern hemisphere? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO No, you need to make the right comparison. So we compare our order board here in this presentation to last year. And last year, our order books were record high. So if you compare to a normal average order book we have in a very good year, we are still doing fine. So therefore, I don't expect a huge change. I think this was a normal situation, and we needed also in some of our area and some of our products' order book to be a little lower because we just couldn't cope with it. Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO We still have probably 4 to 5 months of orders in North America and Europe. So that, for us, is a good level. Michael E. Cox Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Okay. One quick follow-up on the tax rate, it was down quite a bit from the first quarter. What should we be expecting for the tax rate in the back half of the year? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO In the back half -- well, we're changing our full year expectation, bringing it down a little more to about 26%, 27% on the full year basis. So second half, that will pull it down a little more than what we had originally thought. Michael E. Cox Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Was there any one-time type of benefit in that quarter? Or is it just a mix of... Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO No, it's mix. It's primarily the improvement in the Northern America earnings drives that rate down. Operator Your next question comes from Jerry Revich of Goldman Sachs. Jerry David Revich Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Research Division Andy, can you say more about the margin expansion in South America versus last year, versus last quarter however you want to frame it? Yes, how much of that was due to the weak real versus other cost savings? It doesn't sound like, based on your earlier answer, your pricing was a big part of the answer there. Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Jerry, in the first quarter, we had some impact from acquisitions that pulled down the margins a little unusually in the second quarter. Things kind of got back to normal, and we've been doing a great job in terms of managing material cost in Brazil. As you point out, pricing isn't great. But it's positive. So we're getting a good differential between how we're managing material cost and what the pricing is. And then the mix was a little better in the second quarter as well. So those were the key drivers. On an FX point of view, it probably gave us 20, 30 basis points improvement. Jerry David Revich Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Research Division And in terms of investment spending you've outlined in China, what's the timing around that? It doesn't look like you've spent much in this quarter. Just give us a sense for how we should think about back half of the year versus what we saw this quarter? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Yes. As you look at both the expenses around start-up costs in China, let's say, more like 60% to 70% of that will be in the back half. And then on the Fendt side, where we have start-up costs relating to the movement into the new assembly operation, you have more like 70% of those costs in the back half, primarily in the third quarter. Jerry David Revich Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Research Division Okay. And in terms of -- with the GSI business, you've outlined the year-to-date sales of roughly $400 million, which call it 60% of your full year of sales guidance but sharply higher proportion of profits. What's going on with the cost structure in the back half of the year versus the front half? And just help us understand, please, the typical seasonality in the business. Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO What happens is the fourth quarter is the lowest quarter of the year. It's only -- the sales are less than 20% of the total. And so what you see is in the third quarter, they start ramping down production. So the production levels are the highest in the second quarter. It starts to be ramped down in the third, and then the fourth is relatively low production and industrial activity there. And so as a result, you see some reduction in margins, just not as much leverage over the cost structure there. So that's pulling the margins down. Overall, the margins are still very strong for the full year. Excluding amortization intangibles, we should be in the 15% to 15.5% range. But in the fourth quarter, again, the margins are quite low and pulled that number down for the year. Operator Your next question comes from Steve Volkmann of Jefferies. Stephen Edward Volkmann Jefferies LLC, Research Division Just Martin, curious how you're thinking might have evolved with respect to dividends. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Yes. So I think I reflected about our position already a little bit, and I would like Andy to make the legally right statement in order to keep me out of jail. Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Well, 2 things. We've been obviously interested in changing our capital allocation strategy. And as you can see in our release, the very back end of our release, we have gotten our board to approve a share repurchase program. And that program is designed to primarily focus on limiting the amount of dilution that's created by our equity incentive plans that we have. So we have a $50 million share buyback authorization, and we should see some amount of share buybacks starting here at the back end of this year. As it relates to dividends, that's another part of our strategy. And we intend to have a thorough discussion with our board in the back half of this year, and we'd hope that we'll have something that we can announce later this year. Our intention is to strongly consider a dividend in the future. Stephen Edward Volkmann Jefferies LLC, Research Division Okay, great. And I apologize if I might have missed this. But just given the production sort of timing, especially with respect to Fendt in Europe, did you give us any sense of what the margin trajectory third quarter, fourth quarter we should sort of expect? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Yes. In terms of the third quarter, we should see some margin improvement, but it will be limited because of some of the issues that you've discussed, some of the start-up costs and things like that. So we're looking at probably somewhere in that 50-basis-point improvement in the back half of the year as oppose to much more improvement. So as we get to the full year, we're again looking somewhere 50, 75 but maybe even a little bit higher than that for the full year. Stephen Edward Volkmann Jefferies LLC, Research Division So 50 bps in the back half, that's year-over-year? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Right. Operator Your next question comes from Andy Casey of Wells Fargo. Andrew Millard Casey Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division Back to North America, and then I'd like to go international for one question. But realizing the Midwest's horrible drought, based on your experience, do farmers invest with crop insurance proceeds? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO Yes, so many farmers do. So it's not an individual decision so -- but you will -- that is something, therefore, difficult to discuss but some will be compensated. Andrew Millard Casey Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division Okay. And then in the context of your disclosure on the good backlogs and some of the products in North America, if the conditions continue to decline and for whatever reasons, farmer investment starts to decline as well. Can you help us understand what you're looking at? Or what you're watching to initiate production curtailment actions? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Andy, what we always do in these situations, whether the market is going up or down, is we monitor certain things very closely, certainly orders. We monitor retail activity. And certainly, what -- that's what drives all of our business planning as the sale to the end customer. And then we monitor dealer inventory levels. So all those are critical factors in determining what our production and sales forecast should be. Because obviously, we -- there's no benefit in increasing our level of inventory to our dealers. We want to see that flowing through the customers -- end customers. And so we'll be monitoring that very closely, looking at our order boards. And if there's adjustments up or down, we'll continue to do that in the normal course of our activities. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO What we do have -- basically, we try to have about 20% to 30% term labor in our factories, which makes us very flexible. This year, and most probably I think also next year, our problem is just the opposite. We need capacity in some of our factories. And so last year also in the U.S., we hired about 500 people. So therefore, we are not looking into the direction of sizing the factories down, but we can do it if needed rather quickly. Andrew Millard Casey Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division Okay. And then could you comment if you're seeing any short-term demand impact from the Russian drought? Or is the replacement demand more than offsetting any issues over there? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO The replacement amount is huge, so that means the drought will not really matter in Russia at all. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Tim Thein of Citigroup. Timothy Thein Citigroup Inc, Research Division Just coming back on the comments you made regard to -- with regards to pricing. Andy, is that relative to price cost? Is your outlook for the year changed? You mentioned that the tick-down in pricing -- just interested to hear how that's kind of trended relative to your outlook for material cost for the balance of the year. Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO No, I'd say it's pretty stable. We're seeing not much pressure on material cost. And so a small change in pricing is probably not going to affect our overall margin outlook. So we're still confident and feel comfortable that we'll get those margins that we have forecasted in the back half of the year. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO And the main driving factor for us [indiscernible] just very important component for us is the automotive industry and with their production going down globally. Not in the U.S. but globally, we see steel prices also going down, which is a big advantage for us. Timothy Thein Citigroup Inc, Research Division All right, that's I was getting at in terms of -- or have you seen that corresponding benefit that may be moving in tandem with that? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO We see that. Timothy Thein Citigroup Inc, Research Division Okay. And just on the GSI breakdown, can you remind us what the -- you gave the sales split between grain storage versus protein. Do you have a rough proxy in terms of the EBITDA contribution between those 2 businesses? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO The margins between those 2 businesses are roughly the same. So you can assume its proportional. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO And it's like 50/50. In a way, it's something -- make it easy. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Joel Tiss [ph] of BMO. Unknown Analyst I've heard a little bit about financing weakening in Europe, and I just wondered if you're seeing that at all. Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO We do not see that. Most of our farmers' financing needs are taken care of by AGCO Finance anyhow, so therefore, we don't see that. And then in many European markets, you have dedicated special banks so -- where you might see problems. In general, you don't see it in farming because you have Credit Agricole in -- for example, as one of those focus banks in France. And you have coop banks in the Netherlands and Germany and in Scandinavia. So therefore -- and they never were involved in the -- they didn't take the risk of some of other banks, because they were much more local. And therefore, they're not -- I think I would be astonished if a farmer would have a problem to finance his investment. Unknown Analyst Okay. And then I don't know if you answered this or not. But the margin in the U.S. business, is that excluding GSI? Is that a new sustainable level you think? And I don't mean across all cycles and everything. But are we -- are you kind of hitting your stride a little more? Or is there something in there that was a little unique to the quarter that we're still kind of building? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO They're incredibly behind. Andy already talked about the details, and he can give you an update on that. But overall, of course, there's a strategy for margin improvements for AGCO globally but certainly, also here for North America, where there's a lot of strategic initiatives we implemented. And now Andy can go into the details because -- you did it already. Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Joel, I think you always have to keep in mind seasonality. So -- and the second quarter is a seasonally strong margin period for us. As I said, some of these was due to sprayers, which is really a first half product line; hay equipments, very strong in the second quarter. So there's some seasonality there. But from the standpoint of -- if you look over a full year of whether these margins are sustainable, we certainly believe they are and continuing to work on other improvement opportunities in the market there. Operator Your final question comes from the line of Seth Weber of RBC Capital Markets. Seth Robert Weber RBC Capital Markets, LLC, Research Division Just going back to the higher dealer number -- inventory numbers, can you comment -- are you seeing any change in used equipment? Is that starting to back up at all? Or have used equipment prices changed? Martin H. Richenhagen Chairman, President & CEO We don't see, first of all, higher dealer inventory numbers in general. So the dealer inventories are in good shape. We don't see any increase in used, and we don't see any price deterioration in used either. So the markets are very strong. Seth Robert Weber RBC Capital Markets, LLC, Research Division Okay. And then just lastly, your Fendt expansion should be -- I think you walked through it. Your payments are kind of back-half loaded this year. I mean, is CapEx, do you think, continuing to move up to the right next year? Or do you think that we'll have -- this is kind of a peakish number, and it should start to trend down? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO As we look forward, we would expect another relatively heavy CapEx period in 2013 as well. The big project for 2013 is the manufacturing facility in China, and most of the spending for that project is in 2013. So we still have the opportunity to move CapEx up and down to some extent, but our projections are that it will be in the same level at least in 2013. Operator That was our final question. Presenters, do you have any closing remarks? Andrew H. Beck Senior VP & CFO Yes, thank you. I -- we just wanted to thank everyone for their participation and encourage you to follow up later today if you have additional questions. Thank you. Operator This concludes today's conference call. You may now disconnect.
Question and Answer Operator [Operator instructions] We have a question from the line of Tobey Sommer with SunTrust. Tobey Sommer I wanted to get your thoughts on the hiring environment for nurse and Allied. What are you seeing in terms of the supply out there and is there any pressure in terms of pay rates? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director Well, first maybe we’ll step back and look at what’s happening in the overall healthcare community. There has been some movement in the number of healthcare job openings; of course, we can’t get it real time for nurses specifically but if you just look at the data on the number of job openings and quits, we’ve seen an uptick on the latest data which was reported in August. And that’s not surprising based upon what we’re hearing from our clients and based on the increase in new applications that we’ve seen. I mentioned that we’ve seen a nice sequential pickup from Q2 to Q3 so we do think we’re starting to see some movement. I also think if you kind of look at the general environment of the strikes that have been occurring over the last several quarters it’s indicative of nurses getting frustrated, burned out, feeling overworked and starting to push back, so we think that’s starting to translate into a slightly higher level of attrition. And Ralph, maybe you can pick it up with what we’re seeing in our specific numbers. Ralph S. Henderson President of Professional Services & Staffing If you take a look just at the travel nurse business, we can always use more nurses so I always start there. But we have begun to see an increase in the number of unique candidates with kind of the difficult- to-fill specialties which is where we target all of our spending efforts. We don’t go just for general applicants because there’s a lot of nurses out there that just don’t travel well or we can’t place on travel assignments, so our focus is on those individuals that match up to client order requirements. So in the travel nurse business for now we are feeling like the increases in candidate supply are keeping up with the increases in order demand on the client side. The second part of your question was about increases on pay rate, and we are beginning to hear from existing travel nurses as well as prospective travel nurses that it’s going to take a little bit more to leverage them out of their existing permanent jobs and get them back into travel jobs. So as we’ve mentioned the last couple of calls, we’ve been working on bill rate increases that would translate into pay rate increases so we can get those people back into the travel nurse pool. In our current candidate database we have over 20,000 people who’ve traveled with us before who are currently in perm roles, and the ability to attract them back into the industry is what will really drive future growth as well as new supply who’s never traveled before. Tobey Sommer Okay great, that’s helpful. And if I could get some color on Q4, what are your thoughts in terms of tax rate? And I noticed share count went down a little bit; is that related to stock-based comp and kind of your share count thoughts for Q4? Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer Well, the share count is still about 46 million. If you’re looking on the press release, because we reported that GAAP loss it’s for calculation [indiscernible] you don’t count certain shares so you just get into the basic share count of 40 million, but I think formally the 46 million shares still exist in Q4. The tax rate, again I gave the adjusted tax rate of 56%. The GAAP rate for Q4 is still heavily influenced by the impairment charge so it’s really not as meaningful for Q4. Tobey Sommer Okay, great. And any trends in terms of travel or housing expenses? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director We’ve actually seen those stabilize. There’s certainly still pressure out there and as we read the industry information there’s expected to be continued pressure because of the lack of availability or the desire to go into permanent housing. There’s still pretty low vacancy across the overall industry but we’ve seen more stabilization in our average daily rent costs as well as in our vacancies, which is very critical to make sure that we don’t have any open rooms and spending where we aren’t generating revenue. So the good news there is that while there are headwinds we seem to have been able to stabilize them within our business. Operator We have a question from the line of Jeff Silber with BMO Capital Markets. Jeffrey Marc Silber BMO Capital Markets U.S. Just a follow-up on the last question regarding supply, Ralph, you had mentioned trying to increase pay rates to entice nurses to travel. Are there any other things your company is doing in order to alleviate that issue? Ralph S. Henderson President of Professional Services & Staffing Yes, increasing pay rates is only one of the things -- that’s a good question. We’ve been working with our clients to increase the number of hours that a nurse works within a given week, to offer kind of longer assignments which in effect increases the amount of take home pay that they have, and then obviously just diversifying the locations that we have to offer jobs, so we recently added a very large client in New York and that’s a very attractive opportunity for nurses. Our Florida orders have increased, that’s good as well. And the good news I think about those 2 cities is they’re less constrained on the rent side than we’ve seen in California, so to kind of put those 2 questions together, California is probably the market that’s having the biggest issue with rent. And then also increases, surprising increases lately in Arizona where we haven’t seen much demand over the last 2, almost 3 years. So having more assignment opportunities for them, having opportunities for them to work more hours, having an assignment for them to go to after they finish this one -- all of those things I think are helping our supply trends. Jeffrey Marc Silber BMO Capital Markets U.S. If I remember correctly those are fairly large markets for you. Ralph S. Henderson President of Professional Services & Staffing They are. Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director They are. And you know, Jeff, just in addition -- everything Ralph described are certainly the most important things that are ultimately going to trigger that nurse to make the decision, but we also have to get the message out. And that’s where having well-trained recruiters and our expertise in marketing, particularly on the internet with social media, has been very beneficial for us. And so we have increased our investment in marketing and advertising and doing some very creative things in social media which is where most of the nurses are looking and talking about jobs and opportunities. So not only do we need to be educating them on what’s available and the attractiveness but they need to be educating one another; that’s actually more powerful and we’re starting to see that happen more. Jeffrey Marc Silber BMO Capital Markets U.S. Great. In your prepared remarks you talked about adding headcount, I was wondering if we could get a little more color. Where are you adding headcount, what types of positions, and what should we expect over the next few quarters or so? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director Sure. Well, we certainly are still adding sales personnel where we see growth and opportunity. We want to make sure that we’re driving that. Although we still have capacity in travel nursing our recruiters have just done a stellar job and their productivity is up considerably there’s still capacity and room for that to grow more, but we want to make sure that we have the bench strength and new star recruiters coming in behind them as well. So we have added a bit on the sales team but then the other adds that Brian was referring to were more in direct support of some of these larger MSPs. If we add a small or even mid-sized MSP we may not need to add any resources that are directly tied; we can absorb it more within our existing infrastructure. But if you get to an 8 million plus type of contract then you need to add very dedicated resources to ensure that you can be implementing and executing well on it. So in those examples, it’s things like on-site supervisor, a clinical director that’s tied directly to that account. That’s unique to us and we think it’s a very critical part of our success with these particularly larger MSPs; as well as just your basic credentialing and operations personnel. Jeffrey Marc Silber BMO Capital Markets U.S. Okay, good. The home healthcare divestiture, I’m just curious. It’s been operated as a separate unit, if I remember correctly. I’m just wondering how easy is it divested from total operations? Robert E. Livonius Former President of Strategic Workforce Solutions - AMN Healthcare Jeff, this is Bob. Yes, it is easy. We’ve had those separated into completely different offices. They actually operate under an entirely different front office platform, and we do think that while the regulatory issues will always be a little more challenging just because you have to transfer Medicare licenses, the actual divestiture or if you will, the sale of that business will be very easy for us to do relative to the rest of our business. Jeffrey Marc Silber BMO Capital Markets U.S. And just one last one for Brian, I just want to double check the guidance for the current quarter that includes home healthcare? Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer Yes, and we wouldn’t likely close until Q1 so we’ll have the full quarter of those home health results in Q4, so it does include that. Jeffrey Marc Silber BMO Capital Markets U.S. And in Q1, assuming the deal goes through, is this going to be recognized as discontinued operations then? Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer We’re still working through the accounting on that but if we have to sign the purchase agreement in Q4 that would be a likely scenario. Operator [Operator instructions] Our next question is from the line of Mark Marcon with Robert W. Baird. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division I was wondering do you have the total pro forma number for year-over-year growth in terms of revenue? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director It’s 9%, but I don’t think we actually calculated it. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division All right, great. I’m just trying to get a feel for the gross margin trends by division. The impact of the worker’s comp accrual reversal, how did that fall across the divisions? Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer About 3/4 of it fell into nurse and Allied, and then the remainder of it, the majority of the remainder went into home health. I had mentioned the home health margin was up in Q3 about 350 basis points; that was really primarily from that worker’s comp adjustment and then in nurse and Allied, I think the impact was 50 basis points. So the nurse and Allied excluding that was still up 30 basis points sequentially. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division Okay. And in terms of the guidance that you’re giving for Q4, is there any anticipation of additional worker’s comp accrual adjustments? Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer No. No, we have the actuarial studies done for worker’s comp in Q1 and Q3, so that’s why that adjustment occurred in Q3. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division Okay, great. So you’re seeing a nice improvement with regards to the gross margin. The one thing is we don’t have Medfinders in the year ago period for the full time, so is there any way to tell us how it looks like on a pro forma basis in terms of profit? It looks like it was up but I’m not sure what the right comparison number is -- I’m talking about nurse and Allied. Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer Just the nurse and Allied segment? I would say it’s been up a little bit but it’s been relatively stable overall, over the last year. What we saw in the first part of the year a little bit of a slip in the margins. We’ve seen a little bit of improvement back in Q3 as we’ve seen so many impacts of the bill rate increases. We’ve maybe come a bit full circle from where we were a few quarters ago. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division Great. And then how should we think about the VMS projects in terms of how quickly they’ll roll on? You mentioned that you signed $35 million worth? When do those really crank up, when would they start contributing, and how should we think about the pricing for those and the gross margin for those relative to the non-VMS business? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director Sure, Mark. First, in terms of the addition of revenue in the second half, it is actually not that great because many of them were implemented mid and kind of later in Q4. And so we’ll see a much greater impact from them of course in Q4 and going into 2012. And so we’re definitely not seeing the full impact, and that’s why even the addition of resources in Q3 for example -- we had no revenue against many of those and still at pretty low levels in Q4. So those specific contracts, you could say that they are at lower- than-average profitability levels. But as they mature into 2012, we would expect them to be at or above our average profitability levels. Bob, maybe I’ll let you jump in and talk about why that is. Robert E. Livonius Former President of Strategic Workforce Solutions - AMN Healthcare A couple things: one is that initially you have some startup costs associated with it. So on a pure profit margin level they’re initially not quite as profitable, but that’s really only on the very large accounts -- the smaller ones we can absorb pretty quickly. The gross margin numbers within those accounts are surprisingly not that far off the base of our total margins and remember, too, that we have the benefit of the margin that we get from our affiliate vendors that rolls into that. So the overall margin frankly on our MSP accounts is substantially higher as a gross profit percent, and then there’s some SG&A that’s associated with it. But from an account basis, we actually believe that our profitability on these accounts is on average better than most of the accounts that we would normally service. That is contrary to what you would normally think about as it relates to that kind of business. You’d typically think of it as a high-volume business, low pricing, but that’s not how we sell it. We sell it as an add value with all of the advantages I think we have, like for example we own our own software and proprietary software, and things like that that we have; that we have over 400 subcontractors who have figured out how to efficiently not only bill and take orders from them but get them paid and get us paid. And all of that accrues to a more profitable overall operation for us in the long run. Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director Mark, I think it’s pretty safe to say, or at least it certainly is our belief that we can operate these MSPs, particularly the larger ones, more profitably than smaller companies because of the infrastructure that we already have in place; and also as Bob suggested we have our own internal software that had been developed by Medfinders years ago. And we don’t have to then typically pay for an outside software package to run these. Sometimes we do if the client really wants that, but in most cases we’re using our own internal software. And then again, our systems have been set up to be able to scale up very quickly without adding the direct expenses. And so if you look at our profitability over the last year, we’ve clearly added a good number of MSPs, and yet we’ve improved the leverage of our travel nurse business considerably over the last year. So that, if you just step back and look at the big picture, that would tell you that these MSP contracts help us gain leverage and are more profitable for us. Ralph S. Henderson President of Professional Services & Staffing I think the only point I’d make is that this is asking about the $35 million and how it will roll in, just keep in mind that that’s pretty much what our run rate’s been almost every quarter. This is not atypical of what we’ve been doing and reporting on, so what we sold in Q1 and Q2 is rolled into Q3, and so certainly our performance and our improvement in overall profitability is a reflection of not just this quarter but multiple quarters of having that success. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division I appreciate that, and that’s part of the reason why I was wondering. I was wondering for 2 reasons: one, to Susan’s point, I did notice that the margins are improving despite the fact that the VMS percentage is increasing, so it would suggest that it is more profitable. And that’s part of the reason I was asking about the year ago on a pro forma basis, just to make sure on that. And then the second thing I was wondering about was just the sequential revenue guidance for nurse and Allied. I realize there’s fewer billing days, but given what you’re rolling on I was wondering if there was any chance that it could actually increase sequentially. Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director Our current guidance is we mentioned that nurse and Allied is expected to be flat, so we’ve taken into consideration these new contracts but we’ve probably admittedly tried to be conservative because as you’re rolling them on you still have the issue of incumbent providers that have nurses there that were pre-booked before you implemented the contract. So if we implemented a contract October 1st, for example, a good number of the people working in Q4 were already booked before October 1; and so we’re just starting to pick up the new orders and the new business. So it is a relatively small piece of the overall opportunity that we’re really capturing in Q4. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division Got it. And then with regards to the home health business, any disclosure in terms of terms -- what sort of cash can we get back? Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer Not at this point. We’re only in the diligence and analyze stage now and we certainly believe that the terms are at market in the current environment but we’ll have to wait to get further along down the path to be able to give more color on that. Operator And we have a question from the line of Josh Vogel with Sidoti & Company. Joshua David Vogel Sidoti & Company, LLC With regards to home health care, I think it’s been about a year now since the Medfinders deal closed, and I’m just curious when you originally made the deal, did you have in the back of your mind that this was a business you’d potentially exit at some point? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director No. Joshua David Vogel Sidoti & Company, LLC I guess given the unfavorable reimbursement environment of funding pressures, could that potentially be a drag on any of your other business units? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director The reimbursement and regulation pressures on our contracting businesses? Joshua David Vogel Sidoti & Company, LLC Just any of your business lines because you noted that that was what was leaning on your future outlook for home healthcare. Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director No, we don’t see the same magnitude of impact. If anything, we believe that healthcare reform in general could be net positive for our staffing businesses as you bring more patients into the system, particularly needing more primary care physicians. There’s projections out there that there will be more physicians needed, more nurses needed. Certainly there’s going to be cost pressures put on the system, but that’s where having these workforce solutions where our goal is to help our clients reduce their overall spending and have the right clinician at the right time for the right duration -- whether it be daily, weekly, monthly or permanent -- we think helps address those cost issues for them. Even if their overall spending is less, if we have a greater percentage of it then we feel that it’s a better win-win situation. Joshua David Vogel Sidoti & Company, LLC Okay. Now with regard to bill pay spreads, do you think that there’s additional expansion that you can achieve here? Ralph S. Henderson President of Professional Services & Staffing Yes, I think we’re probably just kind of at the tip of the iceberg in terms of our bill rate increases starting to impact our margins. But the big question there is how much of it will have to go into employee pay, so I don’t want to get you guys too far out ahead of us by giving too robust a prediction there. Our clients are very educated. They understand the correlation between getting their jobs filled and bill and pay rates, and so we just kind of work with them to set those at the appropriate levels. And they’re not going to be a wild swing in our profitability -- from those conversations, it’s just some incremental improvement. Joshua David Vogel Sidoti & Company, LLC Okay. And I may have missed it but did you give out the revenue for travel nurse? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director The revenue for Q3? I think that we did. For Q3 it was a little over $92 million. Operator And we have a follow-up question from the line of Tobey Sommer with SunTrust. Tobey Sommer I wanted to ask a question about how you square the basic driver of hospital admissions, not necessarily moving in the right direction or at least certainly uniformly in the industry; and the fact that demand for temporary professionals seems to be increasing -- just kind of a general commentary on how you reconcile those 2 seemingly disparate pieces of information. Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director The census and admission levels have been sort of a non-impact on our volume and demand for probably the last couple of years to be honest, just as we’ve seen rebound in our orders and census has remained relatively stagnant or even gone slightly backwards from year to year. I think a difference that we’re seeing is that we are having even more demand in the higher unique specialty areas that are always going to be challenging to fill regardless of where your census is. So areas such as OR, ER, ICU, Labor & Delivery are some of our highest demand areas. Of course we would love to see more demand in general Med/Surg which would be indicative of general census going up. Usually when general census goes up they cannot only recruit the highly specialized nurses, they can’t even get the Med/Surg nurses. But right now they can because of the labor market. And so I think that maybe explains a little bit of the disconnect, that the demand growth we’ve seen has largely been in these high specialty areas. Ralph, anything else to throw in? Ralph S. Henderson President of Professional Services & Staffing What I would probably add is that you’re seeing an increased utilization, kind of a strategic utilization of staffing in the hospital environments where hospitals, because of the census fluctuation, now realize that they need to depend a little bit more on temporary help type solutions to staff their hospitals up and down as the census fluctuates. So we’re seeing just a slight increase there. And as well, a lot of our increases are coming from settings outside of the hospitals which aren’t in the number that you’re talking about, so having a much bigger Allied business and having our local business. As you know, we also introduced some additional lines of business over the last couple years to get deeper into other settings. I think that there’s a benefit there as well, and that’s where the jobs are being created right now. They are outside of the hospital environments. Robert E. Livonius Former President of Strategic Workforce Solutions - AMN Healthcare The only other thing I’d add is just too, I think you mentioned earlier, Susan, about the strikes. And I think that nurses are getting tired. It’s been a lot of pressure, a lot of overtime. Hospitals have been trying to keep their costs down and I think we’ve done a good job of trying to educate them, frankly especially in our MSP clients, to show them actually where their costs are higher when they use overtime than if they use our staff. So I think it’s a great opportunity for us to reeducate clients. As Ralph was just saying, really the value of temporary labor at the right level within hospital systems, and certainly a lot more business outside the acute care setting isn’t being measured the way everybody measures hospital census. Tobey Sommer There’s been some M&A and consolidation within the hospital sector, some noteworthy sales of nonprofits to for-profit firms. Do you see a change in demand from those institutions under new ownership? Do they have a lower or higher utilization of temporary services? Ralph S. Henderson President of Professional Services & Staffing This is Ralph. I’ll try that one first and then I’ll let Bob weigh in as well. It is kind of situation-by-situation and our experience differs, right? So if you have a consolidation where you have, for instance, 2 children’s hospitals in the same market and they consolidate, utilization we’ll see go down. But as well, when you see consolidations of some of the larger players, they’re some of the ones who actually understand the strategic benefits of travel and local staffing, and so then we see utilization tend to go up over time whenever it migrates to some of the larger players. So it is kind of a mixed bag. I think in general it’s good for us because we’re focused on the large accounts and the MSP programs, and so it’s probably better for us than if we were just focused on purely the traditional business or local, kind of opportunistic business. Robert E. Livonius Former President of Strategic Workforce Solutions - AMN Healthcare Yes, the complexity of some of the mergers and then the complexity of the integration of those mergers is an area that we have some good case studies on how well we’ve helped clients to take on additional locations and merge them in, and help them actually be easier for them to do that in terms of how to set up an MSP that will encompass this new business they’ve already acquired. So it really plays to our strengths to see that kind of thing happen, at least in the MSP world. Operator And we have a question from the line of Mark Marcon with Robert W. Baird. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division I was wondering if you could give a little bit more color with regards to the 3 VMS contracts that you mentioned that you had won from incumbents with better terms. Can you give us any more feel there in terms of how that came about? Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director I don’t think we want to give too much specifics and name clients, but I will say they were all very attractive clients in terms of the prestige of the facilities themselves, the attractiveness of the locations; and the attractiveness of the terms of the agreements. And that’s not always strictly around bill rate. As I mentioned, just relating to the incumbents we had better rates and financial terms across them, but it’s also about who they think can actually deliver on the needs that they’re going to have and who’s the best partner for them. And so we find that in these conversations it’s actually far less about bill rates and even financial terms, although everyone’s always cognizant of that, but it’s more about “How can you meet my needs?” And in this market where demand is rising across the country and supply is tight, they want to work with a primary player that has a strong database of candidates and the ability to deliver on that supply when they need it. And obviously being almost twice as large as our closest competitor, we have a very large capability to deliver on that and they know that. But we also need to have strong relationships with affiliate vendors -- other competitors essentially that sign up with us to also deliver on that contract. And this is where we have differed than some of the other MSP providers, in that we see our affiliate vendors as very much a client and an integral part of being successful in these MSPs. And we don’t just hang our hat on 20 or 30 affiliate vendors -- we have I think over 400, right Bob? And our relationship with them is very critical. Bob, do you want to step in? Robert E. Livonius Former President of Strategic Workforce Solutions - AMN Healthcare Yes, I was just going to say, just to tag onto that, even in these 3 examples we may end up with over 100 different subcontractors supporting us in each one of these individual clients. And the reason for that is because we know that it is hard to fill some of these difficult assignments. Actually it has a very positive impact on the relationship when you can tell the client that “We have 100 companies trying to find this ICU nurse for you, and we can’t find one." Perhaps we don’t have a high enough bill rate. So it does help us to educate the client and adds to our credibility when it comes to talking about what kind of rates we should have in the marketplace and how can we be competitive with the local competitors you have in the marketplace. So it’s very much the focus that we find in these wins that we’ve had. Almost entirely all of these wins and other wins that we’ve had pretty much throughout this year have been focused on clients who really are frustrated in the fill rates -- not being able to get their orders filled in a timely fashion. And that really has far overshadowed their big focus on bill rates, because frankly we’ve been able to get some improved rates not only from our existing clients but even as we’ve set up these new clients. Mark Steven Marcon Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division I appreciate that. And then can you talk a little bit about, as we look forward, how you think about the incremental margins flowing through? It sounds like you still need to make some investments behind some of these MSP programs that are coming through, so how much do you think drops down to the EBITDA line? Brian M. Scott Chief Accounting Officer, CFO & Treasurer Actually, I think we have the opportunity to expand our EBITDA margins, particularly looking into 2012. So we saw nice growth in our margins through this year, and even with Q4 with the revenue down we saw a little bit of decline sequentially; that if you look into 2012. Or even looking over the prior year we’ve still seen a nice improvement in our operating margins and we anticipate that continuing into 2012. As we drive our revenue up through implementing more of these accounts then some margin expansion on the gross margin line is expected and really that SG&A leverage, even with these incremental additions. Those are built into the ROI that we do for these accounts and those additions are very critical to those accounts. But outside of those, we can still deliver a lot more leverage with the remainder of our infrastructure -- all of our corporate expenses. Those will not need to change a whole lot next year and so as we grow that top line you’d expect more and more to drop to the bottom line. Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director Hey Mark, you didn’t ask but I’ll actually chime in and mention that I think we have even greater leverage and margin improvement opportunity in our Locums business. We have probably not been as aggressive with our bill rate increases as we could or should have been over the last year or so, and so we think there’s some opportunity to increase our bill rates and increase our spreads over the coming quarters. And it’s not just our belief -- we have seen some external data points that point us to that. And so that’s an area of focus for us over the next year as well, and we’d expect to see some improvement there. Not as much for volume -- while we expect to see volume increase, the nursing leverage will come even more in the way of volume and how we can grow our top line faster than SG&A, but in Locums it’ll come from just managing our pricing and margins better. Operator I will now turn it back to our speakers and Ms. Salka for any closing remarks. Susan R. Salka President, CEO & Director Okay. Well, thank you so much, everybody, for joining us today. We really do appreciate your continued support of AMN and we look forward to updating you on our progress next quarter. I hope everyone has a very happy Thanksgiving with your family and friends. Operator And ladies and gentlemen, this will conclude our conference call for today. We thank you for your participation and for using AT&T Executive Teleconference Service. And you may now disconnect.
Question and Answer Operator [Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from the line of Budd Bugatch with Raymond James. TJ McConville This is actually TJ filling in for Budd. I had a couple of questions, maybe for you Gil, on the operating expenses. I think once I back out all the special charges from this year and last year, we had 70 or so basis points of leverage, and it was nice to see that. Is that just a fixed operating expense leverage this quarter on the higher revenues or is there something else going on there that we should know about? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President There's nothing unusual in the third quarter other than the special charges that Ken talked about. I mean, we feel pretty good the operating expenses have been in line here and really nothing remarkable that I can think of. TJ McConville Did you give us the average ticket? Because I think my calculation showed it down a bit sequentially again. And I know last quarter you’d talked about inflation abating a little bit. I just want to make sure that's still the case. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Well, our calculations the way we've done it consistently here with the average customer for the quarter ended September was hanging about 135.09, which is basically was in the last period. TJ McConville So relatively flat?. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Relatively flat. TJ McConville And last one, Gil, in the past, or Ken or whoever who might want to take a stab at this. You gave us some great information on the markets that you're operating in with the highest unemployment. And unfortunately, given the specter here that, that's going to continue for a while, any updates there? Are those states still performing relatively well? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Well if you look at all of our regions, our geographical regions, they were all positive comping in the third quarter with one exception, which is the North Texas region. But you got to keep that in perspective because for a number of years, North Texas has been our strongest region. So those comparisons are always tougher out there. And they were slightly by the next [indiscernible]. Operator Our next question comes from the line of Laura Champine with Cowen and Company. Laura Allyson Champine Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division If I look at your Q4 revenue guidance compared your slide guidance at the end of last quarter, it's down about $5 million. Gil, is that just a shift of some asset sales or is there anything going on there? We're a little surprised that the revenue guidance wasn't higher for Q4. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President No. Again, the revenue guidance can fluctuate a lot from those non-retail sales, and you can see the non- retail sales were up 21% for the quarter, which is probably the strongest it's been for the last couple of years. And so they were higher than I anticipated, than we've anticipated, when we gave the third quarter guidance last quarter. But we had a great fourth quarter in non-retail sales in '09, and so it was almost $100 million of non-retail sales. So I just don't know if we can maintain that kind of rate increase. I know it won't be 21%. So that's kind of the reason for the revenue, though they may be a little lesser than you might anticipate. Laura Allyson Champine Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division Is there a reason those franchisees will be taking orders earlier this year than they did last year? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President They were in a funk, and the economy was in a funk. The economy is still in a funk, but they've just gotten used to it, I guess. William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director Orders are up, the manufacturing, the plants are up. A lot of sticks going through there. They're all -- shipments to the fulfillment centers are up. So it looks like kind of the tide's turn and they have a lot more confidence in ordering product. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Yes, we had a month or so last year in the third quarter, I think, we actually lost customers after returns and they have some [indiscernible] issue. We got through every month. I mean it kicked off good in July, and we were steady throughout the quarter. So when you have some months, maybe, the third quarter is always tough and there's a tendency for operators not to buy. So when the traffic started off in July heavy, we started buying. We did a Christmas in July promotion this year that I think was very successful and really kicked the quarter off. We really maintained the momentum throughout the entire quarter. Robert Charles Loudermilk Former Chief Executive Officer, President and Director We have the Lucky Dog starting in October so they're gearing up for that. Laura Allyson Champine Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division Another company in your industry that we know well is talking about opening stores in Mexico and Canada. Does that look interesting to Aaron's or do you just have enough opportunities here that you don't need to think about that? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President We're open in Canada. I think we've got 33 some-odd stores already open and area development agreements for 25 or so more. We met with the Canadian franchisees last week and they're getting there. We're very optimistic about where we're getting now. Mexico is a little bit different animal. Though we have explored other ways to get to Mexico and some other South American countries as well. So at this hour we don't plan on opening any company stores there at all. Laura Allyson Champine Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division The customer count growth is still stronger than the comp growth, and I think to really drive margins. If you could get the average dollar amount per agreement back up that would be a great driver. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Will you come in and talk to me tomorrow, and we'll talk about how to figure that out. We're with you that one. Laura Allyson Champine Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division Is the impact mostly just -- are customers taking smaller televisions or is it fewer items or what's the puts and takes there? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Really we deliberately done some of it by stretching some terms to make some of our products more affordable. But we've also still had some price degradation still taking place particularly in the television. I look back at my notes from a year ago and a year ago, we have a 42-inch LCD at $199 a month, and we were just getting ready to drop it to the $99 price point. But we've seen and still seeing some price degradation. We picked up plasma TVs during the last year in a very, very good value we can offer customers. If you can offer the cost consumer a great value particularly in these times, I think that's a win-win deal. So we haven't seen an up-tick in our returns. We've seen an up-tick in delivery, so I think what we're doing is definitely heading in the right direction. We just put about $3, $4, $5 more dollars per agreement on every customer we'd be in great shape. Operator Our next question comes from the line of Matt McCall with BB&T Capital Markets. Matthew Schon McCall BB&T Capital Markets, Research Division I actually want to look back, there was an earlier question about SG&A. There was some leverage on a year-over-year basis, but when I look, I actually see it going the other way sequentially from Q2. Was there, I remember some talk about some increased advertising spend, and you talked about some of the programs that you ran, but was there anything seasonal that would impact that number in Q4 and make your SG&A as a percent of sale tick higher? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President We have had some higher medical expense that has been running through the system this year. We are opening stores and talked about new store drag. Our fuel costs was up a little bit, they're up a little bit in the third quarter a year ago. There wasn't any one thing that would really stand out that's a huge thing. William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director I think line item by line item we're down except for those two key years. Matthew Schon McCall BB&T Capital Markets, Research Division On a sequential basis, those were down? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Yes, pretty much. There's nothing in there. There's bits and pieces. There's fuel costs and there's medical expenses and a few things by that, but there's nothing there that's really remarkable. Matthew Schon McCall BB&T Capital Markets, Research Division And then you talked about some of the personnel efforts and the reallocation resources, and I think, Ken, you broke out 45 associates. Did you talk about any savings there? Is that what it's saying that I didn't really -- somewhat there are bits and pieces to that, was that part of a broader program or that was just steps that you're taking now?. William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director We're just trying to be more efficient and get everybody productive. And when you grow as hard as we've grown, sometimes you got to kind of stand and take a deep breath and say have we done the right things in the right places and added the right people? Because it's certainly easy to add people as you're growing stores and justify, but we slowed the growth rate down now to the 7% and 9% range rather than the 12% to 15%. And you've got turn around do we need -- what do we need to do to get this job done, and we got Robin and Gil both and questioned every department, and I think everybody just took a deep breathe and said let's get the most productive people doing the right thing, and consequently we have some fat. I think every company needs to kind of do a medical checkup like that. And we're challenging our people to come up with better ways to do what we're doing. Robert Charles Loudermilk Former Chief Executive Officer, President and Director I'll kind of follow along with that, Ken. Here in the home office, Ken certainly looked in the field, but in the home office, there were just some issues and technology and some processes that we were doing that we could take advantage of technology both from an audit, I guess, looking into our stores, we'll do a little data mining --and kind of efficiency there and cut some bodies to travel out. Payroll, everything's going electronic, there's a lot of issues there. Real estate, a lot of information that we could see the technology. So on top of the 45 Ken mentioned, and about another I'd say 50 inside the home office, corporate office, that we either shifted around and having 50 bodies down, but we'll add people over time, but you can't take a person that's in real estate to transfer them over into IT. That's a different skill set. And some salary, people get transferred around I think we look at our salaries and maybe in this day and age, we were paying a little too much for the job that needed to get done, and so we had some hard choices to make and we made them, and we'll continue to make them. It's just like lot of companies doing out there. You just got to get efficient. Look at your processes, take advantage of technology, but it's the right thing to do and I think actually, it's given a really positive spree in the company because we're getting more efficient and services feel better. It's a win-win. William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director Matt, I'll sort of go back a little bit. If we didn't -- on our group medical expense and the quarter was up 1.7 million from a year ago and it’s been up all year, so that has hurt us on the operating stand point. So that's the bad news, I guess. But on the good news -- and we did have some severance pay in the quarter. We talked about the people that we reduced. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President But if you there were another 70 some-odd in the office, there would have been a lot of line items. Robert Charles Loudermilk Former Chief Executive Officer, President and Director We've done quite a bit of that. But if we've kind of looked at personnel staffing and the process, and we're not quite done yet. But there's a few other things to be done. But I would roughly say that the effect of what we've done here in the quarter, although it hurt us in the short-term a little bit, we probably have a $3 million to $4 million of savings next year that we will recognize. Everything remain equal in a vacuum somewhat, assuming we can continue on and keep those changes in place. So the $0.02 to $0.03 next year, I could see helping us out what we did this third quarter. Although it hurt us a little bit in the numbers in the operating expense line. Matthew Schon McCall BB&T Capital Markets, Research Division My final question, Gil, as you look at the EPS guidance and your store growth plans for next year, can you give us an idea what the anticipated cash flow would look like? And I'm assuming that's going to be building some cash. I know there's some questions about Mexico and Canada, but really could you give us an idea of where that cash is going to as we look into fiscal year '11? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President We haven't really came out with definitive numbers on that, Matt. A lot of it may go to the government, I don't know. We have about $100 million of cash on hand at the end of the quarter. We're having a situation where we have started paying income taxes this year, and we did pay them through September 15. But what happened about the end of the month, September 30, Congress passed that bonus appreciation for another year, basically for 2010. Although the year was nine months over when they put in the bonus appreciation. So this resulted in us over paying our taxes this year, but we'll have to apply for a quick refund next year unless the government extends it into 2011 and who knows what will happen in that regard. So we generated from operations the first nine months of this year about $47 million from operations. So if our store growth continues on that trend next year, same basically store growth that we've had and if our revenues grow in comparable numbers. We're growing top line 6% to 7% you can comparable [indiscernible] cash flow numbers for nine months next year and extrapolate the yearly. Matthew Schon McCall BB&T Capital Markets, Research Division And then what was over-payment on taxes? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President We got about a $34 million refund coming back, which we'll try to apply for quickie refund in January. So we paid so far $81 million dollars of taxes this year. Operator Our next question comes from the line of John Rowan with Sidoti & Company. John J. Rowan Sidoti & Company, LLC I assume this tax issue with the credit you have is separate from the deferred tax liability that will reverse out next year, correct? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Say that question again. John J. Rowan Sidoti & Company, LLC The overpayment of taxes, can that just be used against the higher cash taxes that you should have next year at deferred tax liability when the accelerated depreciation reverses out? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President You can do it that way, I guess. You will see on our balance sheet. In fact in our balance sheet in press release, there's a big increase in prepaid assets and that's due to the income tax receivable of $50 million or some sort on our balance sheet. Yes, you can apply it. What's going to happen, unless the law the changes is that you'd get a refund now or you can apply it. I think that's just starting making accelerated payments in '11 to make up for the refund you got in '10. John J. Rowan Sidoti & Company, LLC Do you have the gross rental merchandise number? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President In additions to lease merchandise? John J. Rowan Sidoti & Company, LLC Well not the cash flow number, the balance sheet number, rental merchandise on rent, free allowance? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Gross? John J. Rowan Sidoti & Company, LLC Yes. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President $1.178 billion. John J. Rowan Sidoti & Company, LLC And then just also, what is the total debt? Because I know there's another piece in there versus what you guys show on the press release? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President That only debt we have -- only interest bearing debt is $24 million. We don't have any bank debt, we got a few capitalized leases next year. Operator Our next question comes from the line of David Magee with SunTrust Robinson and Humphrey. David Glenn Magee SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division The TV sales, I guess across retail right now have been very weak in the last month or so. Is this an opportunity for you all in the fourth quarter buying excess vendor inventory? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Yes. It seems like an opportunity every month. Do we not take advantage of it, we have been taking advantage of it. And pricing accordingly. But it's tough to hang in there with a price degradation. We try to hold out on prices because when you buy at a great value and put at stores if you drop the lease rate in effect, you're dropping the lease rate for the other 200,000 you had. You got to be careful when that drop. That's what happened a year ago. We had got the price for the current purchases to drop the price of the LCD TV, the 42-inch, and we waited and waited. And we may have waited one month too long, it's a fine line between when to make that drop, but it's in our best interest to buy better any time we get the opportunity to do so. And with the distribution system that we have, we've got the ability to buy them, put it in and move it. David Glenn Magee SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division And what do you think will be the best selling TV in 2011? Based on how much you know now. Robert Charles Loudermilk Former Chief Executive Officer, President and Director Well, we're not the trendsetters. I don't know if you heard of the DLP technology, but it's not what you  see at Best Buy and all the front-line retail stores. In fact, if you see that technology generally it’ll be in the back corner of the room, our customer really likes big. Big is bigger, and they get it. They want high- definition, they want the latest and greatest, but they also like size. And so we ran this television DLP technology in our stores, and I think in 2011, it's still going to be probably the hottest thing. LCDs and the smaller sets are awfully hot and the plasmas are too. But for example, we did $100 million last year with Mitsubishi just in the DLP television and we’ll do $110 million this year. So we're unlike the retailers. You know we're doing a little bit of the LED, the new life [indiscernible] deal which is thinner, but we're doing limited versions of it because typically new technologies come out at a higher price, and then out in our will house for consumer yet, and we have to let the price come down to fit the will house. David Glenn Magee SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division What size do you think will be best DLP next year? Robert Charles Loudermilk Former Chief Executive Officer, President and Director Well the 60’s kind of our gorilla piece, 60-inch, but we've got a 65, 73 and we even introduced an 82-inch two months ago and it's moving pretty rapidly. David Glenn Magee SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division And then I guess secondly, with regard to the higher end of the guidance for next year. I think that requires some margin improvement. Is the deflation on the furniture side, is that enough to give you some meaningful margin improvement in 2011? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Well you know, a third of our business is furniture. And we certainly have seen deflation in that. Robin mentioned that a little bit, our manufacturing plants produce a whole lot more units, but they're doing a lot better job in production costs and inner efficiencies. You'd see deflation in all categories, whether it's furniture, TVs, appliances or whatever you're doing. So you just got to keep working on it and keep those revenues growing. David Glenn Magee SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division Is it more beneficial in the furniture side though just given the pricing is not quite as obvious? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Yes, more latitude in pricing. Robert Charles Loudermilk Former Chief Executive Officer, President and Director Bedding has really taken hold. We're doing a lot more bedding units now. Pillow-top-type beddings, so that our units are way up in beddings. And that's good margin in beds. I think you're probably right, the little hidden items, the bedding and the furniture's probably your opportunity, but there's still some negative pressure on it as far as just cost, but we're taking advantage of it and still build a really good product. Operator Our next question comes from the line of Arvind Bhatia with Sterne Agee. Arvind Bhatia Sterne Agee & Leach Inc., Research Division I'm wondering if you guys can talk about your same-store sales guidance for next year that's embedded in your overall numbers? And then I'm wondering within that, is there any APU improvement that you're baking in? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Well, the answer is we'll have to refine that a little bit. We're not going to really release things through our revenue guidance probably until February when we profess our budgeting in our guidance for '10. I think that though, if you look at things in our revenue for the third quarter, it was up 3.2%, I would suspect that in this fourth quarter of '10 you could expect something similar same-store revenue growth that we had in the third quarter. And then for next year, I mean we basically have to do a 3% to 5% same-store revenue comp to make the numbers work so I guess you can kind mull over that a little bit. Arvind Bhatia Sterne Agee & Leach Inc., Research Division A quick question on margins on retail sales this quarter. If my calculations are correct, you had about a 47% margin, better than what we've seen in recent times. Anything specific going on there? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President The main reason for that is that the Office Furniture sales are getting smaller and smaller and they -- up in sales and Aaron's, we get higher margins on our retail sales in the Office Furniture goes lower and lower and diminishes you get a margin increase. Arvind Bhatia Sterne Agee & Leach Inc., Research Division In terms of looking at future product opportunities, is iPad too small from a pricing standpoint and just the size of the item standpoint to be an opportunity for rent to own, or you think maybe in a year, that could be a product for you guys? Robert Charles Loudermilk Former Chief Executive Officer, President and Director Well, if they’d let us have it we might see it as an opportunity, but it is our -- Apple’s not very interested in our business. Operator Our next question comes from the line of John Baugh with Stifel Nicolaus & Company. John Allen Baugh Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division I guess if we could start just with a tidbit on customer agreements. You usually give that number. Gil do you have that by corporate as well as franchise? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Yes, we do. John, this is Ken, by the way. 1,242,361 on the company stores. And 666,809 on the franchise stores. John Allen Baugh Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division Could you comment on new store productivity? And I’m not looking at it for the quarter, I'm asking either nine months or the last couple of years prior four or five years. Where you opening stores, are they contiguous or are they in existing markets? Are you leveraging some add-spend that way? What are the numbers telling in terms of the ramp of timing-wise and magnitude? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President As far as the geography, we're pretty balanced. I think I've mentioned this before, but we've got roughly 11 operating vice presidents and they're stationed throughout the country. And each year, they're called upon to open eight to 10 stores and they hand-pick their markets along with working in conjunction with real estate based on our ability to put people in the stores and run it. So it's pretty balanced where we go. If we have opened hard in one area in the past and they need a break we may cut them back a little bit and increase another area. So it kind of varies each year based on their ability to run the store. John Allen Baugh Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division And the productivity, are you seeing the revenues ramp over that five-year that you put on those franchise, the UFOC filings, have that changed at all? Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President We update that at the end of every April going on our slideshows you’ll see the one for April. It changes a little bit. It’s not much through the years. There's isn’t a dramatic change in the ramp up, I mean those are averages. We always have good stores and bad stores. Better stores are the ones that ramp quicker, obviously. On average, the ramp-up has been pretty constant during that first five years. Now we've had some stores that are over five years old that kind of lost a little steam every once in awhile and that’s why we've closed a few stores in the last few years. William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director We try hard not to cannibalize our stores. And even as hard as you sometimes try, sometimes we’ll wedge a store in and we'll go back and make the adjustment. We make a mistake, we’ll act on it and then move forward. John Allen Baugh Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division Ken, is the New York State legislation that came down recently, is that going to have any bearing and I know you’re more franchised there, I believe in corporate... William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director We're a little bit of both, but we've always operated in New York under the federal Consumer Lease and they actually, although the legislation could be deemed somewhat unfavorable, it's pretty favorable when you really look at the disclosures and the amounts you can charge. Particularly for us. We would be the least likely to be affected by any of the legislation in our industry because of our price proposition. But in New York, we abide by the federal Consumer Lease and not the state legislation. John Allen Baugh Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division And then my last question is back on this whole deflation issue, and I'm not thinking just TVs, but you made the comment that you're seeing deflation on a lot of places, which I guess would not make Bernanke very happy. But I know you hold product before you put it back or out on lease at a lower price because you'd destroy the pricing you had on existing items out in the field. But when we think about this whole deflation issue numerically, what kind of impact is it having on your business if you had to guess on the revenue line versus, for example, stretching term which is you mentioned is one thing you do? I assume mix is under pressure to some degree as well, people just wanting the smaller unit. How do we think about how much deflation is going on across the company, and how does that impact your numbers? Does it really hurt you? Are you able just to buy stuff at a better price, hold on to it until you feel like offering it to the consumer at a lower price when it doesn't impact existing product in the field. Any color that? William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director Well we don't hold the product, you know you buy the product and we need to turn it. We've just may not offer it at the proper price yet because it maybe a 42-inch television that comes in from one manufacturer at a lower price than the other TV I got from the another manufacture last month. We're really leery at putting it out at a lower price. But what has happened with price degradation, it allows us to allow a customer to get a better price at the price they were typically going to pay. For example, a year ago we were leasing 42-inch LCD TVs for $199 a month ago and now for that same price, you can get a lot larger set. So the customer typically comes in our stores, less than [indiscernible] their will house that's about $100 a month payment that they’re willing to make. And it’s our job to offer that given that mostly [indiscernible] are getting the best value. We're doing a lot of bundling. John Allen Baugh Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division But in that example that you just talked about, Ken, you're actually pocketing the improved margin when your wholesale purchases are less expensive until you decide to drop the price to the retailer. So in that little example, you're actually benefiting from those. William K. Butler Former Chief Operating Officer and Director Absolutely. We're trying to make it work to our benefit. Anytime you're getting lower prices, I think that's a good thing. Somebody asked me about price inflation, is that bad?. We'll figure out how to make it work whichever way it goes on the pendulum, but it certainly wouldn't be as big of a challenge on pricing inflation as it is price deflation, but we've rather have a better price at the end of the day and we'll figure out how to deal with a lower cost. Operator There are currently no additional questions waiting from the phone line. Gilbert L. Danielson Former Executive Vice President Well, thank you for all of you joining us today.
Question and Answer Operator [Operator Instructions] Our first question comes from James Sidoti of Sidoti & Company. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC We could start with the Piccolos. You had a lot of numbers in there, I just want to make sure I got them straight. You said, there were 134 Piccolos sold in the quarter? Is that right? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America Yes. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC And now in addition to those 134 sold, you had approximately -- including those 134, you had 190 placed? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America Yes. That's not an addition. So you take 190 minus the 68 shipped from our warehouse domestic, add that to the 134 and that's the total number. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC As of right now, you're saying that the distributors are empty? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America They are empty. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC So looking ahead to Q4, we should see year-over-year growth in Piccolo placements? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America You should. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC With Piccolo sales rather. Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America Yes. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC And then when it comes to rotors, how many Piccolos or medical rotors were shipped ? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America Just under 400,000. 387,000. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC Those are 400,000 that you sold? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America Yes. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC And then do you think there were medical rotors that were sold from distribution as well? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America Well, what happens is orders that come in the end of December count for Q3. Orders that come in January 4 count for Q4, so the timing of distributor orders can cause some fluctuation. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC So right now there are rotors in inventory at your distributors? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America There are always some rotors in inventory. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC The options expense, you said it was about $1.5 million this quarter? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yes. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC Is that going to stay at that level going forward? Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary It will be lower the following year. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yes, next fiscal year, it will be lower. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC So one more quarter at this level and then that should come down? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO That's right. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC And then on the other income line, now you're sitting on a lot of cash but you're not generating any income. Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary It's the FX, we're lending money for zero, right? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Also we had FX foreign exchange hit as well. The euro bounces around and we do sell some of our products in euro, so that's why you have that. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC So the negative FX effect will offset some of the interest expense? Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary That is correct. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC Then on the Vet side, Marty, can you just tell me what do you think the non-VetScan hematology sales were? What was i-STAT and coag and Heartworm? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO For everything it was probably about $4 million dollars, about $4 million. Operator The next question comes from Jonathan Block at SunTrust. Jonathan David Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division Just on the gross margins which are great again and up I think roughly 300 BPS year-over-year. What do you think about that going forward? In other words, should that smooth out a little bit? I know you sold the two-by-two initiatives, but when you look out to next year, is that another 300 BPS or is it a little less around 100 to 200, considering the other type of capital, i.e. i-STAT, that you're bringing on ? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO I think it's going to continue. Probably not 300 basis points every time, but clearly more than 100 up to 300. There's a lot of leverage in this business and you can tell by the amount of capital. We have more capital this quarter than we did last quarter. But we still maintained the gross margins. So that gives you some idea of the leverage that we have. Also, I might add that we do have some pricing power as well. That will be consumables especially. On the instruments probably a little bit less in the down economy but on the consumables, we've got pricing power. Jonathan David Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division What was the amount of i-STAT just because that's new, specific i-STAT revenues in the quarter? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO We would love to break out everything. We'd love to break out everything. I love to break out everything because I get pretty proud of all this stuff. But my sales and marketing guys tell me to quit doing that because clearly our competition, they dial right into the call here and they keep track of what we're doing. So they asked me to kind of bundle all that stuff together. So if you bundle the Heartworm, the i-STAT, the coag and the hematology reagents, only just the consumables, it's $4.24 million, $4.3 million. Jonathan David Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division And then, the timing of additional asset, Clint, that you alluded to, is that something that you would expect we could see in the beginning of the calendar year 2010 or is that something that is just starting in R&D and is likely nine to 12 months away? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO So we have an R&D schedule here. And of course, everybody knows when you're doing your research and development, your schedules aren't always that tight. But we think that sometime mid this calendar year, we should be submitting some more rapid tests to the USDA. Jonathan David Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division I just want to push you on this one a little bit because I want to make sure I understand it. Again going back to the number of Piccolos, the number of Piccolos sold x the military or is 134 number in the quarter? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO No. It was a total 134. Four of them went to the military, 130 non-military. Jonathan David Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division And that 130 non-military is what compares to the 116, 88 and 82 for the past three quarters, is that correct? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO That's correct. Jonathan David Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division So a lot of the shortfall here seems to have been on the Medical Disc side. And to that you're saying, it wasn't a complete bolus over at the distributors. It was just the timing of orders? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO That's right. Jonathan David Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Research Division I'm just looking at my numbers. 540,000 discs I had versus less than 400 000. So the distributors can swing it that much, about 140,000 discs? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yes. Well, you have big orders that come in either early January or late December. It can happen. Operator The next question comes from Ross Taylor at CL King. Ross Taylor I'll start the Piccolo rotors as well. And I think Brenton mentioned something about focusing on is it three primary distributors. And did that have any impact on how many Piccolo rotors were sold during the quarter? Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary Yes, it did. Because as you reduce the number of distributors, of course, they bleed down their inventory and you don't get to replace that. And again as Clint mentioned, the timing of orders, we have some very large distributors and if they place an order in the last week of the quarter versus the first week of the next quarter it has an impact. But what I can tell you is that in January, our rotors are a very nice growth uptick. Ross Taylor I don't think you want to work forecast any numbers very specifically. But just trying to think about how we can model some numbers out for the next few quarters? Could we look at your Piccolo rotor sales for the first nine months of calendar 2009 and you kind of extrapolate from those levels that is kind of a base line we should be able to grow from our models and numbers? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yes. Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America If I was trying to project rotor growth, I would be looking very closely at Piccolo placements. That to me is the best predictor of rotor growth. And as I mentioned, the first quarter we sold, we placed 82; the second quarter, 114; the third quarter, 193. Ross Taylor You got an awful lot out of the distribution channel. I think you said 87 Piccolos came out of distribution this quarter versus 43 in September and maybe 33 in June. What enabled you to kind of flush those out of the channel this quarter? Brenton G. A. Hanlon Former Vice President of Medical Sales & Marketing for North America We just worked hard. Ross Taylor The veterinary rotors also because I think Marty said that you switched from shipments to your U.S. distributors once per quarter to once per month. And I just wondered if that has any impact on the numbers that you reported in the quarter? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Not across-the-board. Every distributor has their own weathering patterns which sometimes fluctuate. But the economy could of course still have an impact. The distributors that, as you know, that we worked with the typically the smaller ones. And a little bit of cash flow fluctuation with the distributor cause them to look at reducing inventory, trying to make money to make it up elsewhere. Ross Taylor I-STAT, I just wondered if you were able to pick up that business pretty smoothly when you got it exclusive November 1 or if you might have missed some consumable shipments, as you transitioned from Hesco [ph] to you guys? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO I got to tell you, the team here, the customer service group, the sale admin group, the tech service group, the product management, the marketing team, in my opinion they pulled off a miracle. It wasn't as smooth as silk but I want to congratulate those people. They represented this company and represented their products and took extremely good care of the customers and the transition went smooth. Yes, there was an inventory out there and there were a couple of glitches here and there but we're good to go here forward. Ross Taylor Last question, Clint mentioned the hemoglobin specialty tests for the Piccolo. I just wondered if you can review the timing of that and what the significance of that might be for your business? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Hemoglobin is in development and they're completing the feasibility and identifying how to set all the various flags that we need to set for things like the sample not being filled and mistakes that people could make to make sure that we give a good result. And so we don't have a time on that, like I said it's still in feasibility. And of course, hemoglobin helps the physician determine whether a patient is anemic or not. So it has a pretty high-value. Operator [Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from Scott Gleason at Stephens. Scott Gleason Stephens Inc., Research Division Typically around this time of year, if you guys are going to implement a pricing increase on the disc side, is this about the time of the year you do it? Is there any plans this year to implement a kind of price increase on the Disc side? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Currently on the Medical side, we're not increasing prices. Marty, what are your plans for any pricing changes? Martin V. Mulroy Former Chief Commercial Officer for North America Animal Health We just received a small price increase effective January 1. James Philip Sidoti Sidoti & Company, LLC Can you tell us what that amount is? Martin V. Mulroy Former Chief Commercial Officer for North America Animal Health Blended, it's about 5%. Scott Gleason Stephens Inc., Research Division Can you guys talk a little bit about on the Vet side, what you guys are kind of seeing in terms of the percent of your business from competitive converts? Has that kind of changed from kind of the 30%, 25% that you typically see? Martin V. Mulroy Former Chief Commercial Officer for North America Animal Health No. The chemistry, about 65% to 70% is new business. Scott Gleason Stephens Inc., Research Division So that would be bit by better Hesco [ph] converts, Marty? I'm sorry, I mean IDEXX or Hesco [ph] converts? Martin V. Mulroy Former Chief Commercial Officer for North America Animal Health If it's new business, it is a competitive convert because prior to the delivery of our instruments, they were either using a commercial lab or competitive instrument. Scott Gleason Stephens Inc., Research Division I guess, Marty, then can you give us the part that would be I guess basically competitive Point-Of-Care chemistry takeaways? Martin V. Mulroy Former Chief Commercial Officer for North America Animal Health 65% of the chemistry instruments sold that is new business, a little bit more than a half, probably 75% of that or 60% of that is taking out competitive instruments in place. Scott Gleason Stephens Inc., Research Division I know you guys are not going to break out the revenue from the basically the new i-STAT partnership. It looks like on a consensus number if you kind of look at everybody for next year is around $12 million to $13 million or so for that business. Is that still a trajectory you guys feel pretty comfortable with? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yes, I think so. I think that's pretty close. Operator The next question comes from David Clair from at Piper Jaffray. David C. Clair Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Not to harp on the i-STAT side here, but when we think about gross margin and -- can you kind of just frame that a little bit for us? How we should think about that? Is there a significant difference between the overall Vet gross margin and i-STAT? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO There is because the i-STAT product is manufactured by Abbott. We fundamentally distribute it. So clearly the gross margin on the i-STAT is not going to be as much as the gross margin on the products that we make here. So it's probably 10% to 20%, percentage points less. So we figure that the products that we distribute are 10% to 20% percentage points less than the stuff that we make. David C. Clair Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division I should have asked it a different way. Operating margin is what I was talking about. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO So clearly on the operating margin side, we can bring a lot of the stuff that we distribute, that gross margin to the operating margin, because the expenses don't go up that much. They do go up some. Clearly this quarter, we added something like 2000 to 3000 new customers when we became the exclusive distributor for the i-STAT. So adding 2,000 to 3,000 new customers, which means we got to reach out to them as far as setting them up as a customer, taking order, shipping the order, all that stuff. Plus, we have to touch them in person in the field, as well. In the early days that's going to drive up your sales and marketing costs because of that. It also creates somewhat of a distraction to your other products when you get started. But as it becomes routine, then those costs kind of go away. They're built in to your whole system. So I believe that probably more than half of the gross margin goes right to the operating line. David C. Clair Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Maybe a quick follow-up on the sales force then, or actually two parts to this one. Do you think you have the sales force in place to effectively drive the i-STAT opportunity? And then what has the conversion rate then -- I know it's very, very early here but are you making progress with the i-STAT customer base? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO As far as selling them VetScans ? David C. Clair Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Yes, converting them. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO I don't have the exact number. Maybe Marty has an estimate. But clearly the -- we have somewhere -- our goal is to get approximately 80 people in the field. And right now we're between 50 and 60 something people in the field. So Marty is putting his field plan expansion together and we'll be probably in a position to review that at the next quarterly conference call. David C. Clair Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division The 80-person target, over what time frame would that be done, Clint? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO That's kind of the objective to get to 80 people. How we get to 80 people, the timing of when we hire all those people, will be determined by the business. So our goal is a dollar share in earnings and we want to try to maintain that focus on earnings. But yet, on the other hand, if some distribution goes away, we'll move that up a lot quicker. David C. Clair Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division What was the FX contribution to the top line? It sounds like Europe was very strong. Is that all like organic? What was the FX? Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary For the quarter it's 165,000 hits for the quarter but over all for the year, we still have about 325 on FX. So that explains the negative investment income for the quarter of $11,000. Operator [Operator Instructions] Our next question comes from Chris Sessing, AMI Asset Management. Christian Sessing I hate to wait on this on the Piccolo but I'm trying to figure this out. The 32 that were placed under the reagent rental program, does that come out of the 71 that generated revenue? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO No. That's separate. Christian Sessing So 71 were sold outright as capital equipment and the other 32 are being amortized? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yes. Christian Sessing What's the premium on the rotors that someone would have to pay under that program? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO It depends on the volume commitment. Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary It's about $4. Christian Sessing It's about $4 per rotor? Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary Yes. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO So like Brenton said, depending on the volume in a range of, say, $2 to $6. Christian Sessing Al, I missed the exact dollar amount of FX losses that are hitting the interest income line. Can you give us... Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary It's $165,000. Christian Sessing That's 165,000 in the interest income line? Alberto R. Santa Ines Former Chief Financial Officer, Vice President of Finance and Secretary That is correct. That's the FX loss. So you just add -- we paid only about 150,000 actually on investment income, giving us a loss of 11k for the quarter. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Did you give total rotor sales? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO We're just under 1.3 million. About 1,280,000, roughly. Christian Sessing It was 387,000 on the medical side. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Right. Operator [Operator Instructions] There are no further questions. I would like to turn the conference back over to Clint Severson for any closing remarks. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Great. I'd just like to close by thanking all the Abaxis employees for a fantastic job this quarter, growing our sales and earnings sales up 15%, operating earnings up about 14% is a tremendous accomplishment in this very difficult environment. I want to thank everybody also for joining us and we look forward to our Q4 and year-end conference call in late April. Thank you very much. Goodbye. Operator The conference has now concluded. You may now disconnect.
Question and Answer Operator At this time, we will begin the question-and-answer session. (Operator Instructions) And our first question comes from Jim Sidoti from Sidoti & Company. Please go ahead with your question. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Great. First, Brenton I'll just start out with you; Clint mentioned a 50-unit beta site under investigation or - can you give us any color on that? How long you think it will take and who is doing the site evaluation? Brenton Hanlon Well, this is a partner I can’t give you too many details, because we have NDA agreement in place. But, this is a serious company; it is very serious about point-of-care testing in a distributed network. The first trial was three sites ongoing, where we are working out the logistics, the detail, the workflow, the training, information management and when that is complete it will be rolled out to a total of 50 pilot sites. And assuming that works out the way everybody hopes and expects it to do then that will be - there will be a full rollout. I can’t give you any timing because this is a company that is very thorough and pays a lot of attention to detail and is very committed to standardization across their entire network. So it’s a project and it's a lot of work, but I think it’s a very interesting opportunity for us. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Now when that expands to 50 sites, will that contribute to revenue or is that still under an evaluation program? Brenton Hanlon It will start to contribute to revenue, not hugely I mean that’s - it’s a step along the path. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Okay. Brenton Hanlon Its not going to change anybody’s lines - and that’s 50 is the size level. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Any estimate on how many sites it could expand to beyond that should it be successful? Brenton Hanlon Quite a few. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Are we talking several hundred or in that order of magnitude? Brenton Hanlon Yes. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Okay. Marty, a question for you on the price increase; when did that go into effect and do you have any guess as to how much sales were pulled through the previous quarter as a result? Marty Mulroy Price increase for us affected April 1, and I’d say distribution goes forward somewhere between 1 million and 1.5 million. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company And what was the price increase? Marty Mulroy That’s blended weighted about 6%. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Okay, all right. And that container shipment, you said Clint was probably worth on the order of $1 million? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yeah about $1.1 million. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Okay. And Brenton can you just update us on how many sales people you have? Brenton Hanlon We currently have 15 sales people in the field, where we’re probably going to add a few more this quarter, next quarter. We’re building you know gateway to make sure that we’re expanding in a cost effective way. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Okay. How about you, Marty? Are you adding right now or you would stay at this level for the next couple of quarters? Marty Mulroy We will probably have another training class of four to six in September and there is still a lot of room for us to add some people. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company All right. And then, Clint, my last question to you; you had about $0.03 worth of legal expense between the suit with Cepheid and the FTC suit. Can you give us any sense on when you think those get resolved and could that switch from a $0.03 minus to a $0.03 plus when it does? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yeah, it does. I think you know it’s hard to predict when you are dealing with the legal system. But clearly we are doing whatever we can to facilitate this as quickly as possible, but it’s really hard to predict. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Do you think you’re further along on one front than the other or is… Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Well it’s hard to say, it’s hard to say. We have no idea what the FTC is going to do or when they are going to get to it and of course anytime you have a patent situation, the court puts together opportunities to negotiate a settlement. And so like anybody paying a lot of legal fees, you are always open to negotiating some kind of settlement and you just don’t know until everybody comes to stable. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Okay. And then I know you never guide, but do you think it’s fair to say that now that you’re passed this price increase and maybe some timing issues with that and possibly the combinations in Europe, you get back to a double-digit top-line growth level by the back of this year? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yeah. You know I think, I said on the conference call Q4 that I expected double-digit sales growth and double-digit earnings growth excluding the investment in the laboratory. And I am still expecting that for the year. James Sidoti Sidoti & Company Okay. And when do you think the lab starts to generate material revenue? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO We believe it’s going to take six months of operations. We are going to start taking samples in September. Marty is going to do its full national launch in October and we figure about six months after that it will break even. Operator Our next question comes from Ross Taylor from C.L. King. Ross Taylor C.L. King Some are just a couple of basic questions. I missed the Piccolo numbers that you listed, Clint. I don't know if you could break those out for total North America and also for the military or US government? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yeah, so total Piccolo sales in Q1 were 172, 104 were domestic, 42 Europe, 3 Asia, and 23 government. Ross Taylor C.L. King Okay. And Marty may have given, VetScan placements in North America. I wonder if you could go over those numbers and what they were compared to last year. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Okay, so I can give you shipments. We did domestically, well we did a total of 358 VetScan, 231 for domestic, 109 Europe and 18 Asia. Ross Taylor C.L. King Okay. And do you know what that US figure compares to last year, by any chance? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Last year it was 245. Ross Taylor C.L. King Okay. And, also, one of your distributors was acquired a few months ago, and I just wondered if that disrupted any of your rotor volumes in the quarter? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Okay, so, we actually had two distributors disappear. We had one that was acquired by another company that just sells IDEXX products and then two of our distributors actually combined to form one company. So, clearly that does have a short-term effect on the rotor shipments. But it shouldn’t have an effect long- term on the run-rate. It just affects us quarter-by-quarter. So with that comment I will turn over to Marty and let him comment anyway he would like. Marty Mulroy Yeah. Thanks Clint. We had a little bit of disruption in that the distributor that was acquired by the IDEXX distributor. As you all know the distributor cannot sell both product lines they had to pick one and obviously IDEXX had a greater revenue there. So it was probably, a bit of a disruption for us, but it was also a disruption for the distributors, customers, in that they had to all go out and see other sources for the Abaxis products. We did a campaign reaching out to them ourselves to make sure that they did find authorized Abaxis distributors to get their products, but I think we’ve got everything under control and I think the customers are happy with their new distributors and moving forward we should have no long- term and mid-term effect. Ross Taylor C.L. King Okay, and the final two questions had to do with the lab. First, I wondered, when you roll that out, is that going to be a national launch? I think that's the word Clint used. Or maybe you target that to some specific geographies or areas where you have high market share? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO That’s yours Marty. Marty Mulroy Okay. We are doing a targeted launch in a particular city that I rather not disclose, in September and the national campaign will begin in October. Operator Our next question comes from Jonathan Block from SunTrust Robinson Humphrey. Please go ahead with your question. Jonathan Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey Great thanks and good afternoon, guys. Clint, this one might be for you or maybe even for Al. You mentioned the $750,000, I think, for legal in the quarter. How do you think that plays out over the next few quarters? I mean, is that just sort of a good number to use a run rate on until we get maybe some form of resolution? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO I think so. Jonathan Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey Okay. And then, Marty, I believe you said, correct me if I'm wrong, are you now up to 57 reps? Was that the number? Marty Mulroy Yes, 57. Jonathan Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey Okay, and you plan on maybe hiring even another four to six in the September quarter. How are you working as we get closer to the lab? Are you going to sort of bifurcate your sales force and have a specialty, a group of specialty guys focusing on the lab or are you just going to leave it to your current reps to sell both? Can you give us some color there? Marty Mulroy Well, it’s funny that you asked that question because I started outlining that in my drafted script and it got a little bit long, so I cut it out this morning. But that is exactly what we are doing. The majority of sales force will still be hybrid but we did promote four other strongest equipment people to diagnostic system specialists. One of them is functional in the new role today. There are three. We need to add some headcounts, replace them in that sense with account managers, so that they could be functional in their new role on October 1. So October 1, we will have four instrument specialists focused on instruments and then working alongside these four will be 12 account managers focused on -- I wish I had my first draft with me -- focused on applications and utilization and customer satisfaction, customer retention, training in services that we focus on rapid diagnostics and most importantly that we focused on the laboratory service. Jonathan Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey Okay, great. Very helpful color, thank you. And then, Clint, getting back to you. Are you still focusing on the lab? You said six months after national launch in October, given that the lab gets to about breakeven, and that's got to be predicated off some sort of a top-line number. Can you share a range with us? Where do you think this thing is on a quarterly run rate six months post-launch? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Well, quarterly we are guessing, we don’t know for sure. This is a new venture for us and this is a definitely a forward-looking statement and not guidance, but we think around three million in revenue for the quarter. Jonathan Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey $3 million in revenue for the quarter, okay. And then maybe just a couple more. Any sort of an update on the rapid assay? I know you gave us some of your initiatives, going on. But here you are, lapping some of the heartworm initiatives. And what's going on the field? I mean, do you feel like you're still gaining share in the heartworm-only market? Has it gotten more competitive and maybe that run rate has flattened out? Any color would be great. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Okay. So Marty, why don’t you handle that one? Marty Mulroy Yeah, sure. The heartworms of course, is a great product, its priced right, its easy to read and its fast and its accurate and reliable. Adding the Parvo virus and Giardia, it kind of helps a lot and here is why. They love the heartworm they are going to call our distributors to order the Abaxis heartworm but then they need to call another distributor to order the Parvo and Giardia. Well not they can call an Abaxis distributor to order heartworm, Parvo and Giardia, but they still they need to call another IDEXX distributor for example may be line or (inaudible). So the more rapid assays we will continue to build momentum. I don’t know, a rapid test I don’t see plateauing for years to come, many years. Jonathan Block SunTrust Robinson Humphrey And one last one, Brenton, you know I can't forget about you. It sounds like you've got some things going on with some of the bigger deals but I think some of these big deals haven't been discussed for a while. So can you give us some color on why these seem to take so long to close? I mean, were some of the ones that were talked about a year ago, did those now materialize and now the 50 pilot that you mentioned today is something a little bit newer? Can you help out with why again these pilots seem to take a while to go and close? Brenton Hanlon Well, the 50 pilot that I talked about today, it really was initiated maybe only three or four weeks ago. So it’s a new initiative. The reason why these projects take so long is, there’s a lot steps involved. The customer has to do extensive validations of the Piccolo against their own central laboratory that takes a lot of time. And there is a lot of proposals and presentations and you know it’s complicated and if you’re dealing with a hospital, there’s a lot of interested parties in an integrated delivery network and you have to touch every base and everybody has to be onboard and that takes a lot of time. Operator (Operator Instructions). Our next question comes from David Clair from Piper Jaffray. David Clair Piper Jaffray I guess the first question here is just for Brenton. As we look at some of these larger accounts, there are 50 pilot that you've been talking about, is that kind of a biggest opportunity you think that you guys have kind of in the pipeline? Or how should we think about some of the larger orders that are in the pipeline, just in terms of potential size? Brenton Hanlon The typical large deal with an integrated network that we were focused right now, they are usually in 30s, I would say once they roll out, they usually start out slowly, one or two Piccolos and then they try it et cetera. Once they’re fully extended, they are in the 30 to 50 Piccolo range, that would be kind of an average. The most recent initiative that Clint mentioned is somewhat larger than that. So that would be our biggest project, yes. David Clair Piper Jaffray Okay, and as you look at the pipeline of the larger potential accounts, these 30 to 50, I mean, how long do those typically take to close? And any kind of color as to how many you have in the pipeline right now? Brenton Hanlon We have six in the pipe line in addition to the large one that Clint mentioned. Those projects can take anywhere from six to twelve months to close. Three months would be surprisingly fast. Operator (Operator instructions) Our next question comes from Ron Stevens from Ruby Fund. Please go ahead with your question. Ron Stevens Ruby Fund As you know, I've been a shareholder forever. And I am still really bewildered by your management of cash. Here you’ve had $100 million in the bank earning right under 1% for the longest time - years. And whenever the stock price goes down, you don’t buy back your stock, you don’t declare a dividend, you don’t make an acquisition, you just sit there with this cash. I really don’t understand. Could you please explain your policy on this matter? Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Right, so we actually have done acquisitions. We acquired intellectual properties for the rapid test a couple years ago, of about 5 million. We invested in a small company in Denmark that is our vendor for our COAG chain, of 2.8 million, I believe, it was. The reference lab that we are building out here will take an investment of around 3 million and I think once the opportunity with some of these larger Piccolo accounts, once we get some positive traction on these, we are going to look for opportunities to add to our Piccolo product lines. Now what we’re doing on the vet side where we started with the VetScan, then we added hematology, then we added the rapid tests. Then we added COAG and then we did the distribution deal on the i-STAT. So I think what we have is, we have a vision here or a picture of the company that is much, much larger than Abaxis of today, And so while 100 million is lot of cash for the company our size, we are looking at our company potentially being a lot bigger in a couple of years. And in order to facilitate that of course we do need some capital. To do that, when you look at the stock price dropping and we haven’t bought any stock over the last 12 months, I don’t have all the numbers in front of me, but I remember the stock dropping not much, we’re buying stock to be attractive between $25 to $30 a share. But clearly if there was an opportunity to buy stock at what we considered a ridiculously low price, we could tee up our board and get permission to buyback stock. But I think the priority of Abaxis right now is clearly these four projects are critical and Abaxis’ Veterinary Reference Lab is an opportunity that we can participate in $800 million market with nearly only two major players. So with all that opportunity in front of us we need to be careful about looking too close to just the short- term benefits and so that’s kind of where we’re at. The Board debates this every board meeting and I have it on the agenda almost permanently and so our next Board meeting is actually going to be our shareholder meeting and it comes up in October it will be on the agenda I guess and we’ll keep looking at it. Ron Stevens Ruby Fund Well Clint, and of course, I am not suggesting that you use the whole $100 million. But $40 million or $50 million in the last two or three years when your stock has gotten down to $20 or even $18 or $21 or $22 it would have a 30%, 35% gain in value. And there's nothing wrong with doing that related to the fact that it serves your shareholders' purpose and your balance sheet purpose. So I'm not suggesting any grandiose use of the cash, but certainly a $100 million, when you only invested $10 million in the three projects you just mentioned, $10 million versus $100 million, and now it's $110 million. It just doesn't add up to me. But thanks for your thoughts. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Yeah. Just looking back I agree with you but if you look forward, like we are, the thing that we have in place depending on how the business goes, the ideas that we have in place and the plans that we are trying to implement, the numbers look a lot bigger than what the company is today. And so while I am not opposed to buying back stock its just, I don't think the stock price has gotten to where it was that attractive to buy it back relative to having the cash available through opportunistic deals and so like I said we put it on the agenda every quarter at the board meeting. Operator (Operator Instructions) And I'm showing no additional questions. We will now conclude the question- and-answer session. Now I would like to conference call back over to Mr. Clint Severson for any closing remarks. Clinton H. Severson Chairman of the Board & CEO Thank you very much and thanks to everybody for joining us. And we are looking forward here to Q2 and getting our growth rate back to historical levels, continue to implement the two-by-two programs, expanding the gross margins on our discs and our instruments as well as hopefully closing some of the big deals Brady’s got working. So with that I bid you a good afternoon and thank you again for joining us. Operator The conference is now concluded. We thank you for attending today’s presentation. You may now disconnect your telephone lines.
Question and Answer Operator [Operator Instructions] Your first question comes from Ken Zerbe with Morgan Stanley. Kenneth Allen Zerbe Morgan Stanley, Research Division Just to be really clear on the TRA. So I get that you've executed on the $116 million. That seems to be a locked in gain. Just the way the press release reads about the additional, what, the $394 million, I guess, you got $171 million coming in. I just want to make sure that -- is that a locked in gain in third quarter such that if you go on Slide 12, you get a $279 million gain in third quarter? Is that... Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO So -- yes, Ken, so these are basically put and call structures. We own a put option and Vantiv owns a call option on a quarterly basis on predetermined cash flows. And both of these options basically remove the contingency associated with the TRA cash flows and, therefore, we are required to book an upfront asset for the present value of these assets, which will basically result in a $163 million pretax gain in Q3. So we will book an asset of $163 million on a pretax basis. And then we have basically the cash payment of $116 million that we will be receiving for the $331 million in gross cash flows, so that's the combination of the 2. James C. Leonard Executive VP & Treasurer And Ken, this is Jamie. One nuance to the CCAR approval and Tayfun's reference to realized after-tax gains, when it comes to capital deployment of these gains, the $116 million, because it is recognizing and realized would result in our ability to deploy that capital on an after-tax basis in the $76 million or so range this quarter. And the reason we broke out Slide 12 the way we did was to show you that the capital deployment related to the recognition of the asset -- or the receivable, the $163 million, would be deployable as those puts and calls are exercised and cash is exchanged in the quarterly installments you see in 2017 and 2018. Kenneth Allen Zerbe Morgan Stanley, Research Division Got it. So the right-hand chart basically -- so the left-hand chart says you book an asset of $163, the right-hand chart says as the cash comes in, you don't recognize the gain, you simply -- it's an offsetting asset. So cash goes up, asset goes down. Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO Correct. Operator Your next question comes from David Eads with UBS. David Eads UBS Investment Bank, Research Division I wanted to talk about the NII outlook. There -- it looked like there was an ending -- end of period basis, there is a pretty big ramp up in securities. Is -- was there anything unusual with that strategy there? And I guess, shouldn't -- should that benefit the NII outlook in the next quarter? Kind of was there anything unusual with the positioning on the securities there? James C. Leonard Executive VP & Treasurer Yes, good question. One item related to the end of period balance sheet versus the average is that the end of period includes the unrealized gain and the average balances do not. So good news is we had $1.355 billion unrealized gain in the portfolio that makes it look like on an end of point basis we had added some leverage. But to your question in terms of the outlook on the portfolio, the one assumption in our NII outlook is that given the low rate environment, the flatter curve and the tight spreads, we don't expect to reinvest portfolio cash flows in the third quarter of roughly $1 billion or so during the quarter so that you should expect on the securities portfolio that average balances would be stable to down slightly from second quarter to third quarter. David Eads UBS Investment Bank, Research Division All right, that's very helpful. And maybe -- you talked about the 2- to 4-basis-points NIM pressure in 3Q. If we assume, no rate hikes just for simplicity. Should we expect more pressure on NIM going forward? Or once the kind of headwinds around the loan -- the debt issuance come through, can NIM be a little bit more stable from there? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO David, I think the NIM contraction looking forward -- I mean, we gave you some guidance for Q3, and there may be a little bit more left in contraction if rates do not go up. And obviously, these comments depend on the shape of the yield curve. But over the long term, if we all see an environment like today's in the next year or 2, our expectation is that our NIM will be fairly stable. I mean, there may be some contraction from here, but it's not going to be a continuous bleed out of the NIM. We expect that given our risk exposures and interest rate risk management approach, we will be able to stabilize the NIM. Operator Your next question comes from Ken Usdin with Jefferies. Kenneth Michael Usdin Jefferies LLC, Research Division Just wanted to ask you a question on the fee outlook. So this quarter it seemed like you had -- the servicing hedge was a bit of a delta, and you mentioned the good pipelines you have on mortgage. So just wondering if you could help us understand just the drivers of core income if in fact it's just mostly related to kind of getting that back on the mortgage side. Or do you also continue to expect good growth in some of the core fee line items? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO Yes. So let me make a couple of comments on fee seasonality. Obviously, given the rate movements, we do expect a good quarter in mortgage. I think our pipeline looked strong at the end of the second quarter, which should play well for the third quarter. And also, we had a very strong corporate fee performance in Q2. Typically, we would see some weakness -- just general seasonal weakness in the summer in corporate fees, but we expect a healthy environment in Q4 and so good corporate growth in Q4. And we would expect the other fee lines in general to be stable. So our expectation of a second half sort of strength in fee income relates to continued strength in mortgage here in the near term and then good corporate strength as we approach the end of the year. Kenneth Michael Usdin Jefferies LLC, Research Division Okay, great. And if I could follow up on the TRA comments, so the $163 million that is an asset, when you get the cash flows back next year, are you able to buy back the amount of the cash flows that are laid out on the right side of Page 12? James C. Leonard Executive VP & Treasurer Yes, but on an after-tax basis. So the TRA payments from Vantiv to Fifth Third will need to be tax-effected for capital deployment. Kenneth Michael Usdin Jefferies LLC, Research Division Right, but I just want to -- I think there's some confusion. So the $116 million, you're very clear on, that, you can do right away. The $163 million... James C. Leonard Executive VP & Treasurer In the tune of $76 million, yes. Kenneth Michael Usdin Jefferies LLC, Research Division Right, on an after-tax basis. And then the $163 million comes through in the cash flows we see on the right side. But on an after-tax basis, you could then buy those back but only as they're recognized along that schedule of 2017 and '18? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO That's correct, Ken. James C. Leonard Executive VP & Treasurer That's exactly right. Kenneth Michael Usdin Jefferies LLC, Research Division Okay. And you didn't sell any shares this quarter, so that still is an open-ended question, too, about what's the thought process behind when and your decision trees behind incremental actual share sales? Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO Ken, this is Greg. This discussion comes up quite a bit. We've been very, very disciplined on how we monetize our equity position in Vantiv. And I would say we continue to look at what's the right thing for our shareholders, and we're going to continue to do that as we move forward in the remainder of this year. But we've been disciplined, that's rewarded our shareholders very well. It is something we always consider, and we'll continue to consider and evaluate as we move forward. Operator Your next question comes from Paul Miller with FBR & Co. Timothy Paul Hayes FBR Capital Markets & Co., Research Division This is Tim for Paul. Touching on the average loan growth outlook, that 2%, how does that stack up with your expectations from last quarter? I believe you guys had mentioned 3% growth on the commercial side on the last call. And so should commercial loans still grow at a faster pace than the rest of the portfolio? Lars C. Anderson Executive VP & COO Yes, so what -- I think what we shared in the past is that we would expect to outpace GDP, and that's exactly what we delivered for this quarter, particularly in commercial loans. You saw good growth, very diversified across our markets, across a number of businesses that we continue to emphasize, invest in. And we would expect that we would have that same type of performance throughout the balance of the year as Tayfun has previously guided. Timothy Paul Hayes FBR Capital Markets & Co., Research Division Okay, understood. And then just kind of to that end, the drop-down in provisions, was that solely due to an improvement in credit and outlook for credit? Or does it reflect the change in loan growth assumptions? That $91 million that you guys did this quarter, is that a good base for provisions to grow off of? Or should we see further improvement? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO Yes, first of all, we -- I just want to make sure that everybody understands. Our coverage ratio remained at 1.38%, so we did not drop the coverage ratio. It's just reflective of the loan growth. And it's a quarterly analysis, and we went through our analysis. The credit trends looked good, and we just provided $4 million. Going forward, as I commented, I think provision will reflect loan growth. Operator Your next question comes from Matt O'Connor with Deutsche Bank. Matthew D. O'Connor Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division A couple of follow-ups on topics that have already been covered a little bit. But just on the commercial loan growth, I guess, why haven't we seen more growth there? I know there have been some de-risking going on, and you've been very focused on pricing. But I guess, when did those factors run its course and you get back to maybe kind of more industry commercial loan growth levels? Lars C. Anderson Executive VP & COO Well, first of all, I'd tell you, we feel good about our commercial loan growth for this quarter. It was largely in line with our peers. Yes, I mean, we've had some headwinds as we have repositioned our portfolio, as we've decreased exposures to nonstrategic relationships in industries such as commodity sector. But this is really about not overreaching and focusing on client selection. And that's -- we're going to focus on what we can control. And frankly,, we're doing that. If you look across all of our business, all of our verticals, we're seeing some excellent growth. We're continuing to expand those. We're seeing growth across our core, middle market franchise. That's very promising for us. So when we would expect to see any significant change in us relative to say H8 data, very difficult to tell, we're going to focus on what we can control, and that is building deep client relationships with attractive returns for our clients very deliberately so that we prudently use our capital and our liquidity. And frankly, we build long-term relationships with our clients. Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO Matt, this is Greg. The only thing I would add to Lars' comment, this has been one of our core strategies, building our balance sheet to be good through this cycle, but we've been very selective on the relationships, the geography, asset diversification is extremely important. We're very pleased with the commercial loan growth that we saw in this quarter. It's consistent with our strategies as we move forward. Matthew D. O'Connor Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division Okay. And then maybe a follow-up on NIM for Tayfun or Jamie. I think the comment was beyond the third quarter you think you can keep the NIM relatively stable even in this rate environment and was just hoping to get a little more color on that. That's obviously better than peers and would be an accomplishment in such a difficult rate environment. So you mentioned some hedges and swaps and protection, but just elaborate a little bit on how you keep NIM stable beyond 3Q. James C. Leonard Executive VP & Treasurer Yes, Matt, I think on NIM, and what you've seen from us the past couple of quarters is that most if not all of our contraction are from things we've intentionally done, whether that's debt issuance or the sale of some of the nonstrategic assets that we've completed. And going forward, the NIM compression, whether it's the third quarter or perhaps even after the third quarter again would -- if we were to have compression, it will be based on things we're intentionally doing if we were to have more debt issuances that could be a factor to drive a little bit more compression. But overall, we're pleased with how we've positioned the securities portfolios, as Tayfun mentioned, the bullet and locked-out cash flows. We're not as susceptible to this low rate environment over the next few quarters. But if this environment were to continue for an extended period of time, then it would be more challenging to have stable NIM. But at least over the foreseeable future, we feel like we've positioned the book as well as we could for this lower-for-longer environment. We've talked to you guys about that over the past 2 years as we built the securities portfolio. And then the one factor you haven't heard from us over the past couple of quarters is the fact that loan yield compression just really hasn't been a factor in our NIM. And given the pricing strategies and success that we've had executing on the loan side, we think we can continue to deliver a stable NIM as the loans come on the sheet at yields we're comfortable with. Lars C. Anderson Executive VP & COO Yes, Jamie, just to maybe tag on to that, we are being very deliberate in terms of our discipline credit pricing, and as Greg had mentioned, our client selection. We're very focused on businesses and markets, in which we believe that we can outperform. And frankly, that has really helped us to stabilize those loan spreads. In a couple areas, we've seen some slight improvement. We're going to continue that strategy. I would tell you post-Brexit, we have seen a little bit more competitive environment. But we're going to continue to stay focused on the strategy. It's producing the right kinds of outcomes, specifically consistent with what Greg has shared previously. Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO Yes. And I also want to clarify that I did say that we may see just a few more basis points in Q4 based upon what Jamie just mentioned about some capital market activities. But beyond that, I think for -- looking out another 2, 3 quarters, I think we expect stability in the NIM. Operator Your next question comes from Matt Burnell with Wells Fargo Securities. Matthew Hart Burnell Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division Just wanted to follow-up on the comment you just made in terms of your -- how deliberate your -- you've been in terms of client selection and pricing. I'm curious either in terms of are there markets where there is greater pricing pressure and, therefore, more pressure to try to get clients to drive fee income within your footprint? Or are those more in the lending offices that may not be in the middle of your branch footprint? Lars C. Anderson Executive VP & COO Yes, so -- I mean, we do see variation geographically from quarter-to-quarter, year-to-year. And clearly, we have some markets that are more competitive than others. But I'll tell you, our value proposition, what we're delivering, is being very well received. I'll give you an example. Chicago, this is a very competitive marketplace. We've seen -- in fact, that's been our fastest-growing regional market that we have in our footprint. Every day, we're having to earn it client by client. But also, I would tell you, across the industry verticals, we continue to focus on stacking our resources against those opportunities where we can get the best returns. But it's not just about the balance sheet, I'd remind you, it's about the total client relationship. And it's one of the reasons that, as Greg shared earlier, we continue to invest in other fee sources and solutions to build out an advisory-based relationship with our clients and, frankly, that's helping to drive the P&L also for us, so I think that this is all coming together nicely for us. Matthew Hart Burnell Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division Okay. And for my follow-up, Tayfun, maybe if I could follow-up in terms of the 5% fee growth guidance. I just want to make sure that we understand the basis of that. That excludes any Vantiv-related gains, but it includes other sale gains? Or are all of those excluded the way you would exclude them for core fee income? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO Yes. So first of all, the base comparison in 2015 is to about a $2.3 billion number. So our reported number was I think $2.4 billion, so you just exclude -- I'm sorry, $3 billion. When you exclude all the Vantiv- related gains in '15, you get to a point -- $2.3 billion. The 5% is relative to that number, excludes any Vantiv gains. The only gain really that -- it also excludes, obviously, the branch gains as well. So it would be, from our perspective, our core performance this year. Matthew Hart Burnell Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division Okay, that implies a relatively greater growth in the second half in fees, roughly about 9% by my calculation in the second half versus the second half of last year. I appreciate that you expect a rebound in the fourth quarter in corporate fees, but that seems a bit stronger than you've had previously. Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO I think our numbers may not necessarily compare well. I wouldn't get to a 9% type number. I think you already know our first quarter and second quarter numbers, if you exclude the gains that were booked against the branch sales, so I would basically advise you to follow that 5% growth off of $2.3 billion, take out the first half and then look at the remaining 2 quarters, again, with some weakness in corporate in the summer but they pick up in the fourth quarter and strength in mortgage in the third quarter. So those are how we are getting to our 5% number. Matthew Hart Burnell Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division Okay. I'll circle back with Sameer to get my numbers straight. Operator Your next question comes from John Pancari with Evercore. Stephen M. Moss Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division It's Steve Moss for John Pancari. Wanted to touch base on the European exposure you have. Do you plan to grow it further or reduce it further? Lars C. Anderson Executive VP & COO Yes. So I think as we've underscored previously, and is in the earnings deck, that we have relatively light exposure in Europe. Let me just reinforce what our strategy is. Our focus is on developing relationships with European, and in some cases, Asian-based, very typically large, strong corporate parents that are focused on expanding into the U.S. where we can deliver domestic services to them. That's our key strategy. So our -- do we plan to grow that in the future? I would say, yes. However, consistent with our Brexit and EU plans and processes and market risk review, we're going to continue to be very cautious about that. But I would see this as an opportunity for us to continue to grow our domestic franchise and build some attractive relationships while we do see some disruption in the marketplace. Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO And Steve, this is Greg. I mean, it's important once again that we stick to the strategies that we put forth in support of our international relationships. You've watched us also over the last couple quarters simply reduce our exposures to any relationship that doesn't meet that strategic objective. Stephen M. Moss Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division Okay. And then also on the CRA downgrade that you guys disclosed earlier in the month, just wondering if there's any incremental work related to that or -- and/or if there's any restriction on M&A activity. Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO Yes, this is Greg. First off, we're very disappointed in that downgrade. Let me remind everybody that was for the period of 2011 through 2013. It was not reflective of CRA activity. With respect to lending, investing and our service commitments, actually we scored satisfactory to outstanding in all those areas. It really is reflective of other agencies' issues with respect to some lending activities that were all closed out recently. So that was disappointing. I also would like to let the group know that the fed will be in later this year to perform the next exam, that will go up through mid-2016, and we're very confident that, that rating will be changed very shortly. So that's kind of the state of the environment. With respect to M&A, there's still opportunities. If you go into bank M&A, it's been very, very low on our priority. Bank M&A, it's at the lowest level of our priorities for how we deploy our capital. We still think in this environment that we trade today that buying back our equity is the best use of deploying our capital. So we don't see this impeding our ability to deliver on our strategies and once again, they'll be back in later this year to perform the next exam. Operator Your next question comes from Christopher Marinac with FIG Partners. Christopher William Marinac FIG Partners, LLC, Research Division I just wanted to reinforce the NII conversation of earlier. How do you feel about growing NII in 2017? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO It's going to be a function of earning asset growth. Again, depending upon obviously rate moves, but assuming that there are no more rate moves over the next 18 months, then NII growth will be a function of earning asset growth. I mean, beyond that, I think it's tough to necessarily predict what happens to credit spreads, et cetera. But assuming some stability reflective of the current market conditions, it will depend upon our ability to grow earning assets. Christopher William Marinac FIG Partners, LLC, Research Division Okay, great. And then just a follow-up on the energy book. Is there any way to handicap how the SNIC exam will go this fall for the next round? Should that be less onerous than it would have been earlier this year? Frank R. Forrest Executive VP & Chief Risk Officer Good question, this is Frank. Thanks for the question. And as you know, the first quarter SNIC exam was focused very heavily on energy. Based on what we know, they'll follow back up. They'll go back and they'll look at the same portfolio, the same credits that they evaluated in the first quarter. What's changed is obviously the price of oil per barrel has stabilized, down a little bit in the last week or 2, but far higher than where it was before. We are -- when you look at our price decks and when you look at our -- all of our scenarios that we run from base to stress, the price of oil is well above that. So I don't think there's going to be near as much noise depending on where price moves between now and then. We moved 8 credits over in the first quarter that were all but 1 reserve-based credits to non accrual, and we had very little, if any, loss forecast from those credits. Our portfolio is stable at this point. And as you know, our portfolio was only 2% of our total book. It's small. It's fairly nominal. We manage it very well, we manage it through our vertical. And our outlook for the rest of the year is really unchanged based on what we know today. Operator Your next question comes from Mike Mayo with CLSA. Michael Lawrence Mayo CLSA Limited, Research Division What inning are you in for the ramp-up in investment spending? And what inning are you in for the savings from all of your initiatives? I can elaborate a little more. The investment spending you've mentioned digital, regulatory back office on the investment side. And on the savings side, you've mentioned vendors, facilities offshore, mortgage loan system, commercial loan system and the branch closings. Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO Right. So first off, where are we. As I mentioned before, Mike, we're at -- this will be the high watermark, we believe, for our investments in technology and from a regulatory perspective, investments we have to make. We've been focused on -- very focused on is how to implement those opportunities or strategic investments in the most frugal way, and you've seen us accomplish that. That's why we brought our guidance down on expenses for the remainder this year and total for the year. So we feel pretty good about where we're at on -- from an expense position on our investments. This would be the high watermark, so we're in the latter innings of that. We're also starting to realize some of the value created by the focus we've put on reducing our infrastructure, areas of the branch re-engineering, personnel re- engineering, the investments we've made to renegotiate our contracts such as Vantiv, MasterCard, and I can go down the list. We're starting to see those benefits hit us actually in the second half of this year, you'll see more of that as we move into 2017. So once again, I know as you are, we are -- we're very focused on positive operating leverage and we fully expect that our plans and our actions will get us there in 2017. Michael Lawrence Mayo CLSA Limited, Research Division Maybe just a follow-up on the savings. Where do you stand with the closing of the 100 branches? Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO Yes, we've completed the closing of the 100 branches with the sale of Pennsylvania for $11 million gain last quarter. So we'll have the full year run rate established by the end of this year, so that $60 million will be fully in the run rate going into 2017. And once, again, I will remind you, Mike, that's an annual exercise. As our consumer preferences evolve, we'll continue to assess our opportunities. And there may be more opportunities as we think about 2017. Michael Lawrence Mayo CLSA Limited, Research Division And last follow-up, just if you add in all the savings from the other initiatives, too, I guess, you haven't really given a number on that, but your goal is for positive operating leverage when? Starting in 2017? And do you have a number for all of those... Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO Yes, we're not giving -- hey, Mike, we're not giving '17 guidance. But clearly going into the planning period that's our target for all of our businesses and staff functions. Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO And Mike, everything we do we put it through the lens, does it meet those objectives that I set forth with ROTCE and ROA and our ability to execute. But thank you for the question. Operator Your next question comes from Geoffrey Elliott with Autonomous. Geoffrey Elliott Autonomous Research LLP On the Vantiv transaction, I think I understand the economics, but what was the rationale for the second stage of the transaction being this put/call option structure? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO So clearly, the goal of the TRA transactions, both from last year as well as this year, was to ensure that from a risk management perspective -- and this is risk related to corporate tax rates, that taxable income, et cetera, to make sure that we have visibility to the value of those cash flows. And clearly, this is an agreement between us and Vantiv. It's a function of their ability to engage in cash transactions upfront versus using cash availability in future periods. Geoffrey Elliott Autonomous Research LLP And then just one more quick one. There was this news earlier in the week about the Chief Legal Officer leaving because of a conflict. I wondered if you could elaborate on that at all? Gregory D. Carmichael Chairman, President & CEO First off, that's always a difficult situation so the comment I've made and we've made as a bank is there was a personal matter that's been brought to our attention that Fifth Third believes represents a conflict of interest. So to resolve this we determined the best course of action was a separation. Heather was a very qualified lawyer and this matter has nothing to do with any of the legal work done by Heather during her tenure -- in her time at Fifth Third. That's really all I can say. Operator Your last question comes from Kevin Barker with Piper Jaffray. Kevin James Barker Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division During this quarter, I mean, you obviously position that mortgage banking may be better in the third quarter. But you also experienced quite a bit of decline in gain on sale margins versus the previous quarter. The first quarter was obviously higher than what we saw from a run rate. Was there any particular hedging losses or something that caused the severe decline? And... Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO No, there isn't. I think the gain on sale margins are a function of channel production, also the realization of the revenues during the quarter, inter-quarter, so it's not necessarily reflective of anything specific. Going into the third quarter, we would expect more of a stability if margins are looking good for now. Kevin James Barker Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Okay. And then in reference to the MSR evaluation adjustments of a positive $6 million, the rate movement in the second quarter was less severe than we saw on the first quarter. Was there less hedging gains this quarter as well in regards [indiscernible]? Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO In which part are you talking about? MSR hedging or are you talking about on the production side pipeline hedging? Kevin James Barker Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division The MSR asset. Tayfun Tuzun Executive VP & CFO No, I mean on the MSR side, our valuation -- net valuation last quarter was $11 million and $6 million this quarter. And it really, ultimately, and we've been fairly tight in terms of our hedge coverage. So it really comes down to the last day of the quarter where we stand in the valuation of those. Operator There are no further questions in the queue at this time. I'll turn the call back over to the presenters. Sameer Shripad Gokhale Former Senior Director of Investor Relation Thank you, Johanna, and thank you all for your interest in Fifth Third Bank. If you have any follow-up questions, please contact the Investor Relations department, and we'll be happy to assist you. Operator This concludes today's conference call. You may now disconnect.
Question and Answer Operator [Operator Instructions] The first question comes from the line of Craig Siegenthaler.[Credit Suisse] Craig William Siegenthaler Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division [Audio Gap] more detail in the commercial side where we've seen a pick up in restructured loans and has this been really a shift in strategy in terms of becoming more aggressive and restructured commercial loans or is this really the lagging nature of the serial [ph] loss cycle? Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board We could not hear the first part of your question, could you repeat that? Craig William Siegenthaler Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division What I was asking about is restructured loan trends. We've seen and kind of know what's going on on the consumer side, but on the commercial side, that's been taking up recently. What I want to know is, if that was really a function of regulatory pressure or maybe a change in strategy for something more kind of near term or is this just really the aging in the series loss [ph] cycle, meaning, you have more potential problem loans on the commercial real estate side so it's more potential to restructure them? Mary E. Tuuk Former Executive Vice President of Corporate Services Yes, Craig. I would characterize it, really more in alignment with how we're working through the cycle. We continue to evaluate opportunities for restructuring on the commercial side on a case-by-case basis where it makes economic sense. In one of the specific characteristics that's important in that decision is the amount of cash flow that's available behind that credit. So in earlier stages of the cycle, where we had situations that were more purely collateral dependent, it wouldn't make sense. As we move through the cycle, we will continue to see additional opportunities for that kind of restructuring on a case-by-case basis given the characterization of the types of credit workout situations that we're working through right now. So there's no regulatory pressure behind it per se, it's just a general reflection of our business strategy. Craig William Siegenthaler Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division Is there any capacity constraints in restructuring loans like man power, people power, workout teams or regulatory pressure hitting, now is in favor of more [ph] workouts we saw last quarter. Is any constraints there? Mary E. Tuuk Former Executive Vice President of Corporate Services The regulatory guidance that was issued last quarter, we felt was really in alignment with how we would view the situations anyway. So again, no specific callout from that perspective. In terms of our staffing and resources, we've been very aggressive in making sure that we've got appropriate staffing levels to work through our issues and we continue to evaluate and monitor that closely as we continue to move through different stages of the cycle. But we're well positioned in terms of our overall staffing capabilities. Operator Your next questions come from the line of Matthew O'Connor with Deutsche Bank. Matthew O'Connor UBS You provided some commentary in terms of how you're thinking about the securities book and wanting to stay relatively neutral. I guess my question is if you look on a period-end basis, there's a big increase in the securities book. And I know there's always a lot of excess deposits at quarter end, so is that more indicative of the securities level going forward or is it kind of artificially high on a period-end basis? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer Hi Matt, this is Dan. I think if you look at the investment security balances, there are some investment balances that are impacted by quarter end liquidity. Those would tend to show up in the line, Other Short- Term Investments. And that primarily just represents excess cash, most of which is just held at the Fed. If you look at the available for sale and the held for maturity investment, securities balances those are up about $2.5 billion. And I think those are the increases that tend to be more permanent and represent additional investment made during the quarter. Along the lines of the comments we made in our prepared remarks. Matthew O'Connor UBS And I guess one concern that a lot of us have is that some of the deposit growth in the industry isn't going to be as sticky as we've seen in the past. So that the deposit will be priced more than expected as rates rise and then some of your fixed rate assets that are being added, say within the securities book, also when the funding cost go up pretty meaningfully. So I guess I'm just wondering how do you think about deposit for pricing and how you balance from those risks? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer Yes, I think those are clearly risks that we're focused on as well. I think there are certain portions of the deposit gains that we've made that won't be sticky. We alluded to some of that with respect to public deposits in our comments. We're mindful of that, that's incorporated into our interest rate risk management and on an overall basis, we remain in a fairly neutral to slightly asset sensitive position. We've done that very thoughtfully. We added to some hedge positions during the quarter, which offset some of the impact of the securities that we've added in order to make sure that we maintain that position. So we're very mindful of the risks you're talking about and we're proactively taking steps to make sure we address those risks. Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board Matt, this is Kevin. The other thing that I would mention is we feel very good about being out and front of it strategically, really on both sides of the business from a retail standpoint as well as the commercial standpoint, which really calls for a lot of focus from our people recognizing the full value of the deposit relationships as we go forward from that standpoint. As well as, as Dan talked about in his comments, some of the strategic shift we've already begun with the bundling offerings and the value-added services that we're providing from that standpoint. I think that's a pretty good start for us in terms of anticipating exactly the concerns you have. Matthew O'Connor UBS And then just separately if I can, the regulatory impact on NSF and credit card, do you have a preliminary estimate of what that might be? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer Yes, well obviously, that situation's fairly fluid and there's a number of things that aren't final there. We did make some comments about the deposit fee trends this quarter and expectations next quarter, and certainly that incorporates our views as to the anticipated impact of regulatory changes. And from a bigger picture perspective as we go forward, our thoughts on deposit fees are that beyond the impacts that we alluded to in the fourth quarter and first quarter, that any impacts would be offset by account growth going forward. So relative to a specific estimate of the overall impact of regulatory changes, I don't think we've made a specific estimate of that, that we disclosed. But I think we are incorporating that into the guidance that we've talked about in the comments that we've made. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Todd Hagerman with Collins Stewart. Todd L. Hagerman Collins Stewart LLC, Research Division Kevin, I'm just wondering if you could just give us an update in terms of your thoughts on capital levels and the repayment of TARP. As you know, recently there's been seemingly a little bit more pressure from the government to have some of the banks return the treasury money. But I'm just curious, kind of given your more favorable outlook, particularly as it relates to credit and the healthy capital levels that you have now, as well as kind of your update on the SCAP results, where do you stand now in terms of your capital when you're thinking on repaying TARP and if it includes kind of a 2010 timeline? Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board I guess from my standpoint, what I would tell you is we continue to evaluate our environment. We continue to have -- there is no, I would tell you we don't feel any pressure, except that we have a number of constituents with differing objectives and we feel good about the continuing improvements in our results, in our capital levels, the environment as we kind of highlighted for you today. What our objectives continue to be is to resolve TARP in a way that is thoughtful and considers all of our constituents, including our shareholders and it remains a corporate priority. So from my standpoint in terms of what we've discussed late last year and even into this point, we still feel about in the same position from that perspective. And as we get better clarity on what expectations we feel would be the right way to handle it, we'll communicate that. But we don't feel a pressure at this stage really other than focus on continuing to do the things we know add value for the company at this point. Todd L. Hagerman Collins Stewart LLC, Research Division But I mean, is it fair to assume though, again, assuming that the trends that we saw this quarter continue that it's certainly possible that the TARP would be repaid in 2010? Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board Yes, Todd, I think that's a fair statement. Again, expectations continue and we continue to improve and the environment continues to improve, I think that's a fair assessment. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Chris Mutascio with Stifel, Nicolaus. Christopher Mark Mutascio Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division You gave pretty explicit guidance and I appreciate that in terms of what first quarter may look forward to in terms of margin, fee income and revenue. And getting to a pretax pre-provision line item of roughly 530, I know that's just for first quarter and might be seasonally low. But that implies in order to break even, that your loss rate would have to go from the 365 charge-off rate you had this quarter, almost down 100 points to about 265 in order for the pretax pre-provision earnings to cover losses. Is that a reasonable target to get down to 26 in terms of net charge-offs in 2010? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer I didn't quite follow all the math. Christopher Mark Mutascio Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division I guess if you just apply, you can back in to what the loan loss provision expense to get below 530 and your loss rate to be just due [ph] back on the envelope on $80 billion of loans. If charge-offs would have to drop to 2.6% of loans in order for provision expense to drop down and match charge-offs, provision expense to get to 530. I'm just trying to get -- you've talked about improvement in 2010, can we see that good of improvement in losses for 2010? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer Yes, I think on an overall basis, Mary made some comments relative to our baseline expectations for the year would be for charge-offs to be lower and I think from a big picture perspective, I don't think that the levels that you're talking about there are something that would be unreasonable, as expectation right now. Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board We indicated in margins, we expect charge-offs to be $2.6 billion. And the other thing I would just add is we also indicated that we expect PPNR to bounce back in the second quarter to about this quarter's levels which were 560. Christopher Mark Mutascio Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division Can you just give me more color on the tax. It looks like there was a fairly significant tax benefit and if you've talked about this in the call, forgive me. There's four different banks reported this morning, but the tax benefit was pretty significant this quarter, any more color on that going forward? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer Yes, I think the quarterly tax calculations, I think in an environment like the one that we're in can get to be a little complex and that the taxes that are recorded each quarter, really reflect an estimate of what the year end overall tax rate will be depending on levels of taxable income and that's impacted by credits and permanent items, which have a bigger impact on the effective rate depending on how much income you have. So I think our overall tax provision this quarter was really reflective of just working through those year end calculations. And it's kind of the final true up for the year. There was not any significant adjustment included in there. We did have some significant period items related to leasing litigation and bank-owned life insurance that were in the first quarter that impacted the overall effective rate for the year and contributed to a very low effective tax rate overall. I think as you look forward, the best way to look at our taxes is that we have about $100 million in tax credits that we would anticipate for 2010. And then our marginal tax rate on income that we earned is about 36%. So depending on the level of income, if you put that $100 million in tax credits with a provision of 36% of expected income, you'd come up with a tax rate. It won't be 36%, would likely be less than that given the impact of the credits. But exactly what that rate would end up being will be a function of what taxable income for the year ends up being. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Paul Miller with FBR Capital Markets. Paul Jessie Miller FBR Capital Markets & Co., Research Division Given the fact that your capital levels have improved and credits getting better, and you have talked about in the past about doing FDIC assisted transactions. Are you starting to get more involved in that, have you studied that more, or you just haven't seen anything that's come out to interest you at this point? Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board As we've talked about in the past, FDIC deals could be interesting, could make sense to us as long as they fit with our existing franchise and financially. As we talked about in terms of the kind of the internal qualitative measure is really, these transactions involve significant amount of work out resources. And those folks for us as we reported today are doing important work for us right now. So as we see that balanced, load, continue to improve and shift, which would give us capacity, that would be, in my mind, the driver in terms of increased appetite in interest from our standpoint. So that's really kind of the whole way we're looking at it right now, Paul. Paul Jessie Miller FBR Capital Markets & Co., Research Division And the other issue, I mean I don't want to put you on the spot here. But you definitely got great credit trends and won some of the toughest states, being Michigan and Florida, your operations in the country unfortunately. Have you seen improvement in the unemployment rate because that's some of the things that we like to look at. Or that just if you're seeing stabilization in businesses and stabilization with your customer base but not necessarily stabilization with the job growth in the areas that you're in? Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board Yes, I guess Paul, you would like to put me on the spot. But the way I'd respond to that, if you look at it across our footprint, we're not seeing improvement yet. But we are seeing some stabilization. And I think that's the key element for us in those markets specifically that you mentioned. So I think that's relevant to us at this point in the cycle. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Dennis Klaeser with Raymond James. Dennis L. Klaeser Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division Two related questions with regards to loan loss reserves. When you look further out into 2010, would you expect you'd get to a point where the provision expense would be less than the charge-offs? And then secondly, longer term, what would you think would be a good ballpark estimate for your normalized level of loan loss reserve to total loans? Mary E. Tuuk Former Executive Vice President of Corporate Services As we've indicated in our earlier prepared comments, what we're seeing at this point clearly would be significant improvement in the credit trends that we've discussed. We also talked about very large build that we've made to the reserve in prior quarters. So at this point, although there may be some build left to the reserve, we would see it as being much less significant. And in terms of the actual timing of that, that's still to be determined. Clearly, we have to look at that in the context of a number of different factors. But we do definitely see a trend of much less significant build and just don't have an exact timeline for that yet. Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer I would add in response to the second part of the question relative to what we would anticipate our reserve allowances being going forward on a more normalized basis. Of course, those determinations need to be made at the time based on the condition of the portfolio and economic conditions at the time. Historically, I guess for some context, that figure in more normalized times has ranged from about 1% to maybe 1.4%, 1.5%. In more normalized times, I know that's a pretty wide range but I think that's probably a pretty good historical perspective to base expectations of a normalized future on. Dennis L. Klaeser Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division I know it's difficult to predict and you got to put yourself in that position at that point in time, but that level could be a 2012, 2013-type level? Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board It's just too early to call, Dennis. I'd love to be able to tell you exactly and I will once we're half through the quarter or two but too early to call. Dennis L. Klaeser Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division And you may have mentioned this earlier, but in terms of the composition of the loan loss reserve now, what portion of it is specific reserves versus the FAS 5 reserves? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer I don't have those numbers in front of me. I think the specific reserve portion of that is a much lower portion but the lion's share of that reserve is the kind of FAS 5 kind of reserves. The 10-Q, when we file it will have a fair amount of detail about the components of the reserve that I just don't have with me right now. But the specific reserves are relatively small, probably 10% or less of the reserve. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Heather Wolf with UBS. Heather Wolf Mattes UBS Investment Bank, Research Division Just a couple of questions on credit. Mary, you mentioned that you do expect redefault rates on modifications to accelerate. Do you have any feel for where those might take out or what you guys are forecasting for that level? Mary E. Tuuk Former Executive Vice President of Corporate Services We haven't forecasted any specific peak per se, but what we are looking at is general trends, particularly with respect to loan modification activity in our mortgage portfolio. So as we look at that, clearly, we have done quite a bit of that activity really since inception of the program. And we continue to make sure that our loan modifications make good business sense but also meet the needs of the borrowers at the same time. As you would expect, there would be some natural re-aging effect that would come out of that. And as we look at what that effect might be, we'll continue to evaluate and analyze to make sure that the activity that we do continue to engage in would make good economic sense for the bank as well as for the borrower. Heather Wolf Mattes UBS Investment Bank, Research Division And do you have a quantification regarding principal forgiveness on this modifications you've done? Mary E. Tuuk Former Executive Vice President of Corporate Services We would very, very rarely forgive principal. It's highly unusual. Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer And Heather, just to be clear in terms of your question, we'd expect our performance on a percentage basis to continue and we've been pleased with that. The dollars will be greater because the pool is greater. Heather Wolf Mattes UBS Investment Bank, Research Division So you don't expect the rate to accelerate in terms of dollar value of redefault? Daniel T. Poston Former EVP, Chief Strategy & Administrative Officer At this point, we do not. Mary E. Tuuk Former Executive Vice President of Corporate Services And just to give you some additional context on that, our redefault rates right now are in line with the industry with regard of different measures that we employed to evaluate the effectiveness of the program. Heather Wolf Mattes UBS Investment Bank, Research Division And then one quick question on C&I. So excluding commercial real estate and commercial construction, I know that this is traditionally a pretty volatile category in terms of migration, what gives you guys the confidence in sort of the pipelines that you see that we won't see another tick up in C&I losses or non- performers? Mary E. Tuuk Former Executive Vice President of Corporate Services There's a couple of different factors that we look at. Clearly, one factor would be the overall economic trends within the footprint. We also would evaluate whether we're seeing any particular themes in certain industry segments within the C&I portfolio. And actually in the past, we have called out a couple of segments of the portfolio more specifically as we saw the segments driving higher losses. The best example for that being real estate related industries within C&I, as well as the dealer portion of the portfolio. We've continue to see an improvement in those areas. And so as we look at the economic factors, as we look at the industry segments, we don't see any particular theme coming out from an industry standpoint, but there's a fairly broad base that we look at. So at this point in time, that would be some of the consideration that would give rise to our comments. The other thing that I would point out in terms of loss severities is there's really kind of a descending priority if you will, with respect to loss severities. Starting first in the commercial portfolio with the nature of the construction product and/ or the homebuilder portfolio. Looking then in other elements of the non-owner occupied portfolio going from there to the owner occupied portfolio. And then finally going to the C&I portion of the portfolio. And because of the characteristics of the C&I portfolio, even as we may still see some additional trust there, the expectation would be that the loss severities in that portion of the portfolio would be far less than what we experienced earlier in the cycle. Kevin T. Kabat Former Executive Vice Chairman of the Board Thanks, everybody. I believe that ends our call, so we appreciate it and we'll talk to you next quarter. Thank you. Operator Thank you. This concludes today's conference. You may now disconnect.
Question and Answer Operator [Operator Instructions] And your first question comes from the line of Bob Napoli from Piper Jaffray & Co. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Steve, the conduits, what pricing do you expect on the 325 million and what did you get on the 100 million? Steven F. Groth Former Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President We don't give the exact coupons on it, but I will tell you that the 100 million was below market costs and we're anticipating the $325 million rollover. We're actually expecting it to renew based on conversations and that would be a little bit better than markets and when I refer to market I'm looking at TALF type of pricing, on AAA deals. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division The business looks like it's going to be shrinking for the foreseeable future, I mean at a pretty decent clip. Can you guys bring the expenses down in line with the decline in the portfolio? I know historically when credit losses move up you guys are spending a lot more to collect and I just didn't know if that would offset the -- impair your ability to bring expenses down in line with the portfolio. Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President That's a very fair question, Bob. Let me point out a couple of things or maybe amplify what you stated. We expense everything as it relates to our repossession, foreclosure and legal costs. We don't capitalize anything. And so to the extent that problems continue and for that matter of amount, you could expect that number to go up. Flip side as far as other expenses, such as personal costs, we have had a policy since the day we opened our doors, not commissioning our sales reps. Our sales reps, marketing reps, are paid on a straight salary basis with an opportunity to participate in the company's equity programs. In an effort not to be overly cute, what generally results in this with this circumstance is, in good times people could make the case that maybe the marketing rep should earn more and the flip side is, is that during soft times such as this, maybe they're earning too much. We believe that the policy is a long-term policy that will have potentially adverse arithmetic outcomes in this type of environment. We remain committed to these policies, although we are not so committed that our feet are in concrete. We'll just leave it with you by saying we'll be very practical. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division I mean your leverage continues to decline at a pretty rapid clip and getting these financings done, I mean are you just going to -- if you play this out, I mean your leverage could be under two to one a year from today. Will you guys buy back some stock or did you just feel like this environment, from a liquidity perspective, is just too uncertain to do that? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President Well, you pointed out once again and highlighted an issue that's routinely discussed at all of the directors' meetings. There's the confluence of factors that will drive the ultimate decision that is made in that regard. For quite some time now capital has been viewed as precious and we have, at least in my opinion, an abundancy of that. Where it's heading and what we'll do with that capital will, in large part, I think you'll read it in the front page of the Wall Street Journal more than you'll hear it from us. We're not in the -- we're all owners and we all take the amount of capital that we had in the business seriously and once again I think that the outcome will be practical. Operator Your next question comes from the line of John Hecht with JMP Securities. John Hecht JMP Securities LLC, Research Division If you could dive far a little bit down more into credit, is there any different trends you're seeing on a regional or segment basis? And what are you seeing at this point with recovery rates in your general lines of business as well? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President It's not regional in nature, what we are experiencing. Transportation continues to be unusually soft in terms of collateral values. I can't paint too many deposit of strokes to the picture as it relates to credit. Credit conditions, I will tell you, are worsening but not at the same pace they were worsening six months ago. I think as the entire economy gets through the difficulties that we are experiencing and at least my belief are experiencing a direct result of the financial crisis at the banking systems. Until those issues are resolved and worked out and the public has confidence in our financial system and more specifically the banks, credit is going to be difficult. Expectations of our borrowers as it relates to, not only their credit but the credit of the people they do business with, is under attack. And whether the state of California not being able to pay people and just work your way down the economic chain, there's a great deal of uncertainty and those uncertainties are not only impacting our ability to originate this business but also collect the business that's on the books. When that's going to change, once again I don't want to cop out and tell you to read it on the front page of the Wall Street Journal but we'll all have a better understanding of that not only as it relates to Financial Federal but as it relates to the entire economy. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Okay and the recovery rate side, anything changing there? Are you still seeing reasonable rates given the economic environment? Steven F. Groth Former Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President We are doing a fabulous job liquidating our repossessions. The markets are softening. As I've said earlier transportation is worse than construction. Construction's on the way to catching up to transportation. So values will remain soft in the near term. John Hecht JMP Securities LLC, Research Division Okay. And then quick question on liquidity. After the 325 million expected to roll, do you have any financing needs in the year, in the remaining part of calendar year '09? Steven F. Groth Former Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President The only bank that's coming due was $15 million and I anticipate we won't hold [ph] that. So that's it for '09. There's -- some of the term securitization that rolls off as the portfolio amortizes that's underneath that deal but very little coming due. John Hecht JMP Securities LLC, Research Division Okay. And so your low leverage liquidity, not a lot of the constraints on the funding side but have you guys -- you mentioned historically, [indiscernible] depository, you also help out there that service the business equipment, are you continually evaluating different alternatives and are you finding any opportunities there? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President As we told you during our last call John, we will advise all when we have something materially to report. I will tell you that we remain involved in the process but my own personal observation is not only as it relates to us heading down that path but several others, things have slowed dramatically and there's not much clarity in terms of direction of where it's headed. Operator Your next question comes from the line of John Sites from Sterne Agee. John Sites I have a question regarding securizitation. Everyone seems to be reporting tightening spread on securitization, I was wondering if that would stimulate lending a little bit on your side? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President They are tight John, this is Paul. They are tightening. It's not the availability of liquidity that constrains us at this moment. What constrains us at this moment is the general health of the businesses that we – not only our financing or having the opportunity to finance. Credit is much more severely constrained at their level than it is at our level, and our level is very constrained. And so all the issues that are governing underwriting are at play today, as they always are but much more severely so than in recent past. We had the liquidity to write the business. And we remain willing to do so but only under terms and conditions that reflect the risk and rewards to each opportunity. Operator [Operator Instructions] Your next question comes from the line of Bob Napoli from Piper Jaffray. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division The competitive environment, you totally lost several very large competitors, I mean if it isn't the Citibank, Citigroup out of your business, now CIT gone from your business. And because of that, can't -- what can't you get pricing up further on the business that there is to do? And other, I mean so maybe just talk about that and then I have a follow up on that topic. Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President The simple answer is yes. But the risk associated with these opportunities is also greater. Rate has always been an issue since the day I started in this business 40 years ago and certainly has been an issue for the 20 years Financial Federal has been in business, but it's not my opinion, at least not the real reason our originations had fallen, it's more of an underwriting issue than it is a pricing issue. But we are pricewise disadvantaged today but once again, we've always been price disadvantaged. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Do you still have the likes of Wachovia that is still aggressively in this market or when you say your competitively pricing disadvantaged, does it mean your charging higher prices than whom? Who is your largest competitor today, is it Wachovia? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President I assume you mean Wells Fargo not Wachovia. No, it really isn't the same company. Wells Fargo is a much more professional organization and was and is our biggest competitor. Look, Bob, and once again for our entire history, we have a pricing disadvantage. We are not deposit orientated. Today, that disadvantage is greater than it probably has been in quite some time. But it is not the deterrent today, in my opinion at least, to writing the new business. It's not a pricing issue, it's credit issue. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division How much has your approval rate gone down, maybe that's the way to think about it? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President We never track that type of statistic and so I would hesitate to answer you. I will tell you that we continue to be able to write a very large percentage of the business that we actually approve, but that's not reflective of anything other than who we are and our culture. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Is there a way to think about it like the flow of business through the pipeline, like how much? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President There is no flow of business today in the pipeline whether it be us or any of our competitors because the public is not buying. If you listen to Caterpillar, Deere, Packard and manage to walks[ph] earnings calls which I do they'll paint the same picture that I'm painting. And the bottom line is if the contracting and trucking public is not buying, our financing opportunities go down. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division So, your originations are down 70% and available business is probably down as much. Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President Yes, it means that our customers base is not expanding today. They are very uncertain about the future and so are we. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division Paul, are there any opportunities given your strong balance sheet to buy portfolios at a discount or anything like that? Is there any... Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President I won't comment specifically other than to tell you that I certainly think that opportunity should present itself sooner rather than later, if it is ever going to present itself. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division And of your sectors, I would imagine that business is down in all of them but is trucking much more difficult than construction or is it pretty equal? And on the credit side, is or most of the credit losses in trucking? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President Transportation is definitely worse than construction but construction is catching up. Transportation  volumes or freight volumes are off a staggering 40% from a year ago. If there's no goods to be transported across the country, these truckers don't operate and if they don't operate, they don't buy trucks and they don't make their payments. Who in the world wants to go out and buy a new truck when the opportunity to move freight is constantly shrinking? Construction, more specifically non-residential construction, always has a lag time when the economy enters a recession because these projects have already been out. They've already been started, the work is being done and people are being paid. What is going to eventually start and probably already has started is the diminution of commercial projects. What generally happens in these circumstances is that's where the government starts to pick up the slack by putting out infrastructure projects. I personally was disappointed in the current administration's plans for and infrastructure allocation of money, I thought it should have been bigger, and I thought it should have been quicker. But it hasn't been and as a result, the amount of work available to the contracting public is shrinking. That also will constrain new business opportunities. Financial Federal, I've always said to you Bob, is really at the heart of the U.S. economy and I think it was in Warren Buffett's letter where I read that he said the economy fell off a cliff around the first of the year. I'm a witness to that and I will reaffirm his observation. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division We think it was actually a few months earlier but you saw the lag effect. Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President Yes. Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President We're not in the business, Bob, of trying to -- we're not heroes, we're not trying to throw anyone touchdown passes. We're trying to remain focused and disciplined as we always have and take what the playing field gives us and try to avoid stepping on a land mine. Robert Paul Napoli Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division When your charge-offs have been pretty well controlled but you've got to believe, I mean obviously they're still going up given the increase and non-accruals and delinquencies. And also on top of that, you have a denominator effect. Do you have a feel or do you think credit losses are going to be worse than the last recession given that this recession is much more difficult? I do think we had some a little more deflation, maybe in some of your key assets types last cycle. Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President This one is so different, Bob, and I hate answering the if and what if questions. It's hard for me to believe that they have peaked, how bad they're going to get, I'll make you the same comments that I made just several years ago when I met you. I wont tell you how bad they're going to get but I'll tell you mine will be the best in the group clearly. How long the circumstance remains with us will in large part go to dictate what those numerical answers will be. I am totally confident in our underwriting, and I am totally confident that whatever numbers we end up producing, they'll be best in class but what they'll ultimately be, I don't know. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Schubin Jack [ph] from Resolution Partners [ph]. Unknown Speaker I was just wondering, do you guys find that you have more of your customers coming in and asking to restructure the debt and maybe change the terms a little bit? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President Yes, I would say on a comparative basis there's more. We just go through a difficult time of the year weatherwise, notwithstanding all the economic noise that's in the system where whether will cause interruptions in some of our customers businesses. But the simple answer to your question is yes, we have seen more. Unknown Speaker When that happens and you guys work with the customer to get a better package together, does that loan then come in to new originations or not? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President Rewrites or extensions rather do not include or not included in new business. Unknown Speaker Is there anything you can say by order of magnitude of how much rewrites are these days or no? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President I do not have that number. Operator Your next question is a follow-up question from the line of John Sites. Henry Joseph Coffey Sterne Agee & Leach Inc., Research Division Actually, it's Henry Coffey. We've always asked you the same questions for about a couple of decades now, but at what point do you think there'll be an environment in which either acquisitions, portfolio acquisitions or of the sort would cross your way? Obviously, there are a lot of assets out there but we haven't seen a lot of transactions? Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President I sure think we're in that set of circumstances where such an event is likely to occur. But, and there's always a but. The but here is a lot of lenders can't afford to book their losses. At least that's my rationalization for why there hasn't been more product on the market, and also it is very, very difficult for the seller much less the buyer to have an understanding of the value of these assets. There's so many great refinancing risks that a lot of people are facing that I think the refinancing risks will drive more of these circumstances than just the deterioration of the portfolio. But today, my expectations have not been met and I tend to be somewhat pollyannish, I'm hopeful that they will be forthcoming shortly. Operator And we have no further questions in queue. I would now like to turn it over back to management for closing remarks. Paul R. Sinsheimer Former Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer and President Once again everyone, thank you for attending this call. We'll be doing one, I guess for our year end in somewhere at the end of September. Have a good summer. We'll talk to you soon. Operator Thank you for your participation. You may now disconnect and have a wonderful day.
Question and Answer Operator [Operator Instructions] Your first question comes from the line of Eric Tracy from Janney Capital Markets. Eric Brandt Tracy Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, Research Division I guess, if I could start just trying to reconcile, maybe Glenn, your comments of the difficulties around the innovation pipeline, so then Sam's comments about feeling a little bit cautiously optimistic about some of the stuff coming to the market. Maybe just a big picture perspective again what you feel like is going on in the running category. Is this categorization sort of trend playing out and how do you manage through that particularly as you -- with Macy's and Running Specialty arguably layered in sort of more exposure to the category, and just sort of how we think through that. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Yes, Eric, this is Glenn. We are always optimistic and -- but we got to check that with reality. And what we said about innovation, there's a lot of updating, but the customers seems to be asking us for more new. And as the challenge that we face where we recognize, we trade at the top of the market, we need to work with the brands every day. This is something that brands are cognizant of. It's something that because running is 40% of our business and because we trade at this top end, it affects our company, it affects us more than any one. This is a Finish Line issue because it's more important to us than it is to any other retailer. Any other retailer that the brands do business with. So the work is hard, the work is -- we're hard charging on this and we are hard charging with the brand. So we'd have to be foolish to be more than cautious about this right now and again, we're partnered up with the brands, trying to make it better as soon as possible with full awareness and full partnership with everybody we do business with. Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Eric, this is Sam, I'll answer your second question about my cautious optimism as I look forward. It stems from 2 things. One is early reads on some of our new receipts like Max 15, new introduction as we move into next year, the early reads on that have been really, really good. And then with the pipeline, our visibility into the pipeline out through fall there's a number of new introductions from both the performance and Nike sportswear in running specifically that have us really excited. So while we're continuing to work through some inventory that isn't selling at full price, as well as it was the last few years, we are seeing some early results on new receipts as well as a forward-looking product pipeline that we feel really good about. Eric Brandt Tracy Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, Research Division Okay. So I guess then, just as follow-up on the dealing with sort of Macy's and Running Specialty Group. I understand that the longer term view is still very much intact and how those sort of drive, and again, how do you manage that, that the volume is now on the marketplace, sort of exposed to the running category. It sounds like you're going to continue sort of the aggressive on the acquisition. Is that just a function of some of these retailers feeling pressed and therefore you are able to get them at a better value or just sort of a walk-through that piece of it. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Yes, Eric, we've talked now for a while about this. The advent of Macy's from a female and from a fashion end of the business, the advent of RSG from a performance standpoint, they don't rely on the same conditions as Finish Line does. So each one of them has plenty of product opportunities. Our challenges with -- while Macy's has been better than planned, better in men's, better in women's and huge opportunities on the upside, in kids and digital. On the RSG front, this is a matter of scale and we've got to get bigger and leverage the overheads that we need to put into this business. We're pushing close to $100 million now in the business and there's got to be some -- we have patience on this thing. We believe in this category. We believe that this is where -- health and wellness is where the customer is going. The community, we're learning about more and more, how to do that across the country and use the best in class opportunities that we're learning about from the people we acquire. So the rules of engagement with the customer different in those 2 businesses. And we're still very optimistic and positive about the results and the growth we're having in those 2 businesses, albeit that the cash cow comes from the mothership. And we're aware of that. So we like the mothership to be paving the way for us to be opportunistic and growing in those other startup businesses that we've had over the last couple of years. That's the focus that we have right now. The mothership has got to perform more productively. So yes, we're going to take a really close look at our overheads and our capital and during this challenging time, we're going to get leaner and meaner about that. Operator Our next question comes from the line of Bernard Sosnick from Gilford securities. Bernard Sosnick Gilford Securities Incorporated, Research Division Could you go into a little bit more detail about the adjustments, the severance, what did that relate to, where did the big income tax credit arise from and what was the impairment charge? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO So Bernie, we had on the severance related to a key executive that left during the quarter, and the tax benefits resulted from -- actually, the last effect of our Man Alive acquisition and getting a large deduction that we've been working on for a while, but now large deduction in connection with the last write off of the stock related to the Man Alive acquisition. Bernard Sosnick Gilford Securities Incorporated, Research Division Okay. And with regard to the digital part of the business you're taking off on fulfillment from store, is there any chance that Macy will fulfill from Finish Line stores as well? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director No. That's not the plan, Bernie. The plan is that the macys.com orders will be routed to The Finish Line shops inside of the Macy's stores. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Paul Trussell from Deutsche Bank. Paul Trussell Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division Going back to some of the category color. If we can just clear up basketball versus running and the impact it's having to margins. Certainly in the second quarter, there was some excess inventories. So if you can just clarify where we stand, specifically on basketball. Is that inventory clean? How do we look or what's the expected impact on gross margins from still clearing up the same basketball excess inventory and then from a running standpoint, what was the impact in the third quarter to the merchandise margins? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Paul, this is Sam, I'll take your first question. So basketball as we stated in our prepared remarks, sharp acceleration in our results from Q2. Much of that was driven by our cleansing of the inventory. We still have some inventory as we purchased through the seasons that will have to continue to address through Q4, which will result in continued margin headwinds as we look through finishing out the quarter and the year. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Let's say, Paul, with respect to the Running Category in Q3, the markdowns in that category is where our margins got hit higher than we expected. So we had higher-than-expected level of markdowns in that running category, which drove the underperformance from margins versus our expectations. Paul Trussell Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division Okay. And as we look forward with maybe more volatile or choppy top line trends, you spoke about focusing on a more flexible expense structure going forward. Could you just discuss some of the details on that, and how can you move to a point where you are able to kind of protect profitability perhaps on a lower threshold. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Yes. So, I mean the details, Paul, we're going to provide more specifically on our call in March, but what I can tell you we're doing is we're carefully prioritizing our capital spend to focus on investments on sales driving, consumer facing initiatives. And we're looking at everything else with respect to capital and expenses and that's where we will be reducing capital spend and reducing expenses in all other areas of the business. But we're working with a high degree of urgency to develop these plans and then begin executing against them. The details of which, we'll report on our call in March. Paul Trussell Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division And Ed, does that -- I'm just trying to understand what that reflects for CapEx guidance for next year. You have previously stated that there will be a modest decline year-over-year as the Macy's shops, obviously are mostly installed at this point. How should we think about CapEx now? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Yes. So CapEx was expected to decline next year. It's going to decline at a steeper rate once we finish on the plans that we're working on. So in our objective here, as Glenn said, as we're looking to reduce our cost structure so that we can offset as much of this margin pressure as we can and stay committed to growing EPS and that from a CapEx standpoint, reducing our near-term capital spending so we can increase our free cash flow and remain committed to all portions of our capital allocation strategy. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Camilo Lyon from Canaccord Genuity. Camilo R. Lyon Canaccord Genuity Limited, Research Division Just delving deeper into the comments around running. I guess, 2 questions here. So the markdowns in the category, was this a relatively new development this quarter. Or have you consistently been running some sort of incremental mark down within the category. And then number 2, is this -- more broadly speaking, is this just a mix issue in the sense of, the fact that you've got some platforms that have gotten to be such large volume that it's now difficult to compare against those large volumes, those large platforms like the Free and it's just a function of time before those that newer technologies and newer introductions gain the scale and the mass so that those can overcome the declines of the stale, kind of growth rates in the larger platforms? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Camilo, this is Sam. Your question and statement are exactly right. So first from a markdown cadence, our margins in running have been challenged as we discussed in Q2. We had to take deeper markdowns in Q3, deeper than what we had planned in order to continue to drive through the inventory. Similar to basketball and my comments to Paul's question before, we've still got some inventory and to your statement, large inventories against these key platforms that we've got to work through, through Q4, it is a mixed issue. We've built strength in our running category over years and in the recent 3 or 4 years, Nike, in particular, with a number of really, really innovative platforms has helped us not only grow, but it's become a big portion of our running business and as the demand for those products start to slow, the size of the business is such that we have to continue to work hard with all of our brand partners to bring innovation to market so that we can transition based on the consumer demands. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Camilo, this is Glenn. Look, the good news is, that it's just as important to the brands as it is to us. We're the leaders in running. And we've got to reposition this thing more aggressively than any of us even thought even 3 or 6 months ago. So everybody is motivated, everybody is engaged and everybody is aligned. So I'm going to be the optimist on this and I'm going to tell you that we're going to get there, we recognize it, we've been through this before, the shifts in the business, and we'll get it fixed as soon as we possibly can with the ultimate support of all the brands. Camilo R. Lyon Canaccord Genuity Limited, Research Division Sam, is it possible to estimate what the comp would've been in the running category had you not taken those markdowns? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director It's too hard to estimate that to me, really. Camilo R. Lyon Canaccord Genuity Limited, Research Division Okay. And then may be thinking about the future next 2 to 3 quarters, it seems like this kind of -- the tougher comparison on the established platforms likely continues and that even though you have some optimism on the new intros that there's going to be some incremental pressure there on the comp or on the gross margin from the cycling of this larger, more established platform. Is that a fair kind of way to thinking about it? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director That's a fair way to think about. We're expecting the margin pressures to continue, which is why we're taking the actions we are on looking at our expense structure, looking at our capital investments. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Taposh Bari from Goldman Sachs. Taposh Bari Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Research Division I had a question on basketball for you, Sam. So the business slowed last quarter, that surprised us and you as well it seems, but it's improved this quarter and albeit, on greater discounting. So I guess, as a postmortem, 3 months later, I think last quarter, you're referring to it as a merchandising issue. Was it in fact, the merchandise issue? Do you feel like it's in a place where -- do you think that it's kind of progressing along the path that you thought it would a quarter ago? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Yes. So what we said last quarter was there is a big part of our business, specifically around Brand Jordan, not Retro-related, that product continues to sell through at the rates we've historically seen and expect in and allocations we're getting from them have been terrific. It's really the other parts of our business, which is a really big part of the basketball business just didn't resonate as strongly with our consumers as we expected. And so similar to second quarter, we've got some of that inventory that's carried over, as well as some of our current receipts that are in that same type of product. So what I would say to you is in the near-term, as I mentioned earlier, we've got some inventory to work through, that will continue to create margin headwinds. As we look out over the next 6 months or so, we think the product pipeline coming out of basketball and specifically, Brand Jordan, looks really, really good. Taposh Bari Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Research Division Great. And then I wanted to follow up, Ed, for you on SG&A, or just the kind of the adjustments that you're making to both OpEx and CapEx. I understand CapEx, you're probably going wait until next quarter to give any guidance on. But as we're thinking about just the run rate of SG&A, it's been up about 10% this year, thinking a lot of that's been driven by Macy's. Where are you in the Macy's shop conversion cycle and how do we think about SG&A dollar growth, kind of run rate now that you're being more flexible on the line? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Yes. So the Macy's shop rollout was completed in the third quarter, so being in the 397 stores is about where we're going to end. Although there will be some work next year on some repositionings to, again, drive more sales. So from a cost comparison there, as we get into next year, where it's going to be more comparable at Macy's, and we won't have the acceleration and other costs associated with the rollout. As I said earlier, we're looking at our cost structure now. We're going to start to take some actions beginning in the fourth quarter even once we get past holidays. So I would expect some of that impact to come through in Q3 and then we'll be more specific about other cost reduction opportunities and talk about those in our March call. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Eddie Plank from Jefferies. Edward Felice Plank Jefferies LLC, Research Division I guess, Ed, just to piggyback on Taposh's question, so can we think about fourth quarter then leveraging on SG&A given the shift in the comp guidance. And then secondarily, I guess, how do you guys feel about the inventory levels at Finish Line? Are they where you wanted to be, given the environment and the markdowns you got to take, or are there plans to reduce that going forward to kind of manage against the environment? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO So the inventory levels are right where we want them to be. The agings are in great shape. Look, we continue to be aggressive in taking the markdowns when we see sell-throughs slow down and keeping that inventory clean. So -- and that's been our MO [ph] and we're going to stay consistent with that. In terms of SG&A leverage in Q4 based on the low to mid-single-digit comp, I would expect some SG&A leverage for us in Q4. Edward Felice Plank Jefferies LLC, Research Division Okay. If I could just ask a quick follow-up then, can you just reconcile the ASP gain to the product margin decline? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO It's a mixed issue, Ed. So we've got some platforms, as Sam mentioned, that are selling well at high price points and the mix of that business versus the markdown product is driving an increased ASP for us. Operator Your next question comes from the line of the Sam Poser from Sterne Agee. Samuel Marc Poser Sterne Agee & Leach Inc., Research Division I've got a few. Number one, can you tell us what the brick-and-mortar comps were for Finish Line? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Yes. They were up slightly, I would say, Sam, in the quarter. I mean Digital drove some very strong gains and that's what drove the 4.5% comp, but brick-and-mortar for the quarter was up slightly. Samuel Marc Poser Sterne Agee & Leach Inc., Research Division Can we let's get into some -- this with running. I mean, it sounds to me like you’re talking about The Finish Line stores as a running specialty store not as a mall-based specialty retailer, and you're talking a lot about performance and high-end performance product, when I think the customers are -- I mean, like 10% maybe buy goods that are -- that they actually wear to go running in. So is this an issue of basically, trying to be in the performance business when there's not a performance customer, they're like fashion customer, and this is basically a fashion miss issue versus the performance miss issue? Glenn S. Lyon Chairman No, Sam, we've always said and if that's kind of what you're hearing, my apologies for that. Our focus at Finish Line has always been around delivering the most relevant products through what we call, and I think you've heard us say in the past, everyday sport, which is products that are certainly with performance attributes, but for our mall-based stores, purchased with the intention of wearing it as their everyday fashion footwear. So the products we happen to carry, obviously are going to be under the umbrella of performance and technology attributes, but the intention and the way we buy product from a color perspective and breadth of color multiples is from an everyday sport lens for sure. Samuel Marc Poser Sterne Agee & Leach Inc., Research Division As a follow-up, are you adequately -- are you getting adequate goods in like the Air Max 95s and 90s, whatever, all those different sort of Retro Air Max's. Are you positioned well enough in, let's say, Saucony Jazz Originals, ASICS, GEL-Lyte's, Puma fashion, Retro Running, Brooks' Retro running, New Balance Retro running, are you positioned there? Because from what we're hearing, that's where all the action is and we're talking about higher end goods from Adidas, Brooks and Nike and so on. I mean, I just like to know -- tell me what you think there. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Sam, this is Glenn. I've go on our track record on being on trend over time. So all those things you're describing, New Balance and the 574s and all the other trends that you're talking about, I think we're well positioned on. However, the fact is that it's about the quality of the entire offering and yes, we're on -- we are the -- the key athletic brands are our partners in this business and it is Nike, and it is Adidas, and it is those brands who still drive the center core of our business. So we're always going to be in those with a high level of sensitivity to the trends and to where the inventory is. I would say to you, this is about quality across the board and Camilo kind of hit on that, it's quality across the board and how many platforms are working at a point in time and it's a little lean right now in there. Are we going to stay with that when the new trends emerge, we'll be on them, and when it moves in our direction, we'll be the first ones to capitalize on it. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Steve Strycula from UBS. Steven A. Strycula UBS Investment Bank, Research Division Just a follow-up on Sam's question a little bit. Wanted to see if you could bifurcate the trends in same- store sales. Just help us understand how the premiere sneakers, call it $100 price point and above, how that's trending relative to the non-premium running shoes, just so we can understand the spread in performance and then similarly, how's Nike running performance relative to other running brands. Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Steve, this is Sam. Well, I would say -- as Glenn mentioned both quality of inventory and trends that are happening. So if the items are on trend regardless of their price, above $100 or below, they're selling well and I would point to in recent times, Roshe Run at $79 to $95, maybe a little bit more than that on their premium Flyknit product selling through extremely well. The new introduction of Max 15 at $190 currently, early read first 2 weeks, 2.5 weeks we've had it, really solid sell-throughs there. So for us, again, we're focused on delivering the most relevant offer and if the products are right, regardless of the price points, they're selling through. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Steve, with respect to the comments specifically on the brands, we don't comment specifically on the performance of any of the brands on their own in terms of quarterly basis. Steven A. Strycula UBS Investment Bank, Research Division Okay. And then just a follow-up on December trends, you mentioned that comps are turning flat, I believe. Does this mean traffic kind of turned negative at this point, or is it a conversion issue, can you just like reconcile the slowdown from November. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Yes. So we were strong out of the gate as we talked about for Thanksgiving weekend. And look, we're still 6 days out from finalization of holiday, so digital has remained strong for us. The comps have been a little under pressure in the stores at this point, but at this point, the stores start to take off and we're going to be strong through completion of holiday. So it's a little early, but again, we remain confident in our ability to deliver that low- to mid-single digit comp for the fourth quarter . Operator Your next question comes from the line of Matthew Boss from JPMorgan. Esteban Gomez JP Morgan Chase & Co, Research Division This is Esteban on for Matt. So given the visibility you guys have in the 4Q trends, have you actually cut orders at this point, and if so what categories and could you walk through the flexibility and lead times you have in this volatile backdrop? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Sorry, the question was cutting store labor is that... ... Esteban Gomez JP Morgan Chase & Co, Research Division Cutting orders. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Cutting orders. No, we haven't cut orders. I mean, we're working on the buy plans that were put in place at the beginning of the quarter. We make adjustments as the season goes, but we don't as a practice go in and based on sales trends, just cut a bunch of orders off our books. New product flow is the most important aspect of sustaining growth and quite frankly, changing trends and so we do work with our brand partners to make adjustments to products that we have on order that are currently in our inventory mix and slowing and we'll make adjustments to those orders appropriately. Esteban Gomez JP Morgan Chase & Co, Research Division Okay. And from a higher level on the EBIT margin, how should we think about your business today versus your 10% prior peak, and I mean what you know today about brick-and-mortar, Macy's and Running Specialty Group? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Well, as we talked about earlier, we're committed to looking at our near-term cost structure and capital spending to offset the margin pressures we're facing and drive growth -- drive profit growth and protect profitability. Long term, we still believe in the opportunities for all of our businesses. Operating margin improvement at Finish Line, particularly in the digital business, operating margin improvement in our Macy's business, as we drive towards the high end of our long-term goals of $250 million to $350 million and then operating margin improvement in our Running Specialty business as we get to scale and start driving profitability in that business. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Eric Johnson from Piper Jaffray. Eric Thomas Johnson Piper Jaffray Companies, Research Division This is Eric in for Erinn. I was just curious, you had talked a long time ago about $450 million digital goal, but it seemed to temper that now while with low 20% range, but over the last few quarters, you seem to be moving ahead of that. I was just wondering if you could update us on how you're planning that going forward. And then in mid-teens, EBIT margin still within the plan or you have levers to take that higher? Glenn S. Lyon Chairman This is Glenn. I'll take the digital part of that. We're as optimistic as ever about the opportunities with our core customer through the digital channels. The business is powerful. The traffic is strong. The ability to provide good service via mobile is the biggest opportunity in the retail business today and our ability to connect them there is a focal point of what we're doing. So there is no hedge on the digital business. I still believe it's a $400 million to $500 million business, and who knows past that. So I'm looking at 3,4 years out and the growth trends look really strong to me. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO And Eric, with respect to the operating margins in the digital business, we're at 15% last year as we continue to drive top line in that business. We'll expand those operating margins into the high teens. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Susan Anderson from FBR Capital Markets. Susan Kay Anderson FBR Capital Markets & Co., Research Division I was wondering if you could give a little bit more color on just how you see the drivers of the comp is ticking up throughout the quarter. It looks like it's from the guidance for the rest of the year, you're expecting it to tick up and just really kind of mall traffic maybe for the past couple of weeks that driven it flat. And then maybe just looking out even further if you could give a little bit more color on your expectation for the product mix in running changing and how should we think about that. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO Sam talked about some of the specific product drivers that are coming this quarter, including some of the basketball business and strengths continuing in the Max 2015, so our belief is that based on those product drivers, as well as what we're seeing in our existing business even though it's flat to date, what we're see in our existing business with respect to where stores can finish between now and the end of the holiday and we our digital business continues to track, again, we believe that we can deliver that low- to mid- single-digit comp for the quarter. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman And then in terms of the traffic, we're right on the cusp of changing over from customers, receiving promises from us to deliver before Christmas without incremental shipping charges. So that happens in the next day or so and then the traffic shifts back to the stores, so we're optimistic that, that traffic shift will drive good comps in the stores for the balance of December. Susan Kay Anderson FBR Capital Markets & Co., Research Division Got it. And then just looking further out. And how long do you think it's going to -- if you have a guess take to kind of get the mix better in running and kind of get things back on track. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Susan, that's what we do every day. There's no question that we need to take more of our inventory and invest it in the newer platforms as a proportion of the total and that, you can tell by our comments today a bit of a surprise as to how quickly that's moving. So we're on it. The brands are on it. The good news is we're totally aligned with them on meeting to make this switch in balance of our inventory across all the brands. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Jeff Van Sinderen from B. Riley. Jeffrey Wallin Van Sinderen B. Riley FBR, Inc., Research Division Just wanted to follow up a little bit more on running. Understand the challenges near term, but is there anything that's structural that you think has changed that would prevent you from getting back to, let's say, stronger full price selling positive comps with increasing merchandise margins. In other words, is there a reason to believe that running as a category, is in a down trend that could be prolonged. Just trying to understand if you think that it's secular fashion trend away from running or a tide shift, if you will, that could be prolonged or if you just think that the issue in running is not having the right mix of running product or just that maybe there is the weak product pipeline that you see improving and that being the driver to change running? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Jeff, I believe that it is the quality of our current offer and the innovation pipeline slowing compared to recent years. I think the demand for running products whether it's from a performance perspective or from an everyday sport perspective, the demand is as good as it's been. And I think, to Glenn's point, on the last question, we work hard every day and we'll continue to get our assortments shifted and place bets on those items we think the customers will respond well to and when we do as example by a couple of key items we have now and the way the consumer is reacting to those items, we believe that the demand will continue to grow. Jeffrey Wallin Van Sinderen B. Riley FBR, Inc., Research Division Okay. And then in basketball, where do you feel like you are at this point in terms of fixing the mix of the basketball product assortment. Is it, I mean, do you feel like you will be -- you will have it when you want it at by Q1 or are you almost there now. Just any better sense you can give us to that. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman I think Q4 will be a quarter that we'll have to aggressively address the carryover inventory. It's hard for me to speculate moving beyond that as we get new receipts throughout Q4. If that product performs or starts to perform the way we think it should, we'll be in a much better position moving into Q1, but I'll tell you when I look at the total 6-month pipeline, there's a number of things in there that have us more optimistic than we've been in the previous 6 months. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Mitch Kummetz from Robert Baird. Mitchel John Kummetz Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division I hate to ask you guys another question on running, but I'm going to do it. I just want to make sure that I'm completely clear in terms of the profitability shortfall there on the quarter. I mean it sounds like it's definitely more an issue of the performance side having a little stale, so you had to be more promotional there versus that their strength on the casual side like Roshe and that may just be a lower margin side of the running business. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman This is Glenn. Let me just say this. We are committed to fresh, new inventory every day, of every month, of every quarter and when the sell-throughs slowed down, we are committed to taking actions to make way for the new stuff. That's a commitment we have to ourselves, to our customers and to our brand partners. So when things slow down and they sell at 8% instead of 9%, that's a big difference in sales. So we've got to drive through better pricing, we've got to drive that inventory through the system. As soon as that shifts and we see the trends as to 5 better -- 5 things that are working instead of 3, it takes that much to change this thing and it takes that much bad to change it to softer trends when you're dealing with. Now remember, this is 40% of our business. So when basketball is a little bit tough, that's a big difference than a little bit of a change in the running business. So again, we've been through this before. The brands have been through this before. This is not a weakness in running. This is changing the assortments and tweaking them and going stronger after the better things and continuing to probe for what's next. Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Mitch, let me add one other bit of clarity. The margin structure for products that come out of performance categories for the brands or casual categories from the brands, the margin structure is not different. Meaning, their initial markups are essentially the same. Mitchel John Kummetz Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division Got it. It's just the gross profit dollars? Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Right. Mitchel John Kummetz Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division And then I got a follow-up on Macy's, this is a more upbeat question. So you guys are at -- you're at 397 stores, you're basically done there. I would imagine over the last 2 years as you've gotten to this point, I mean that's probably -- that's a pretty big endeavor, that's probably stressed the team a little bit, but now you at that 397, could you tell us kind of where the EBIT margins are trending there for the year and then as you think about the business next year, again, now that you achieved this goal, to what extent can the team really focus now on making sure that staffing is right, the assortments are all right to where the next year, maybe there's a real potential for some EBIT margin expansion there. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO So Mitch, coming into the year, our guidance for Macy's top line was to do $175 million to $195 million and we continually point it towards the high end of the guidance range, and as we sit here today, very confident, that we're going to deliver the high end of the guidance range for sales on the profitability side, we expect that the business to be modestly profitable and that's where we sit today with this business. As we look forward our long-term goals for this business has always been to do between $250 million to $350 million and at the mid- to high-point end of that range, we're a high-single digit operating margin business. So we're going to continue to drive this business. As you said, we've spent the better part of the last 18 months undertaking, putting a lot of shops in almost 400 Macy's stores and now it's all about driving the right sales culture in this business and maximizing the opportunities we've been talking about with kids, with store fulfillment on macys.com, and we're going to reposition some of the top performing doors next year, getting more space in better places and that's going to drive increased business for us as we do that, the flow through on that incremental sales will be bigger to our bottom line and this business will continue to improve in terms of profitability towards those long-term goals. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Jay Sole from Morgan Stanley. Jay Daniel Sole Morgan Stanley, Research Division So let's talk about product on the call so far. And a lot of product is outside of your control. It's really the vendors make the product. My question is are there anything from a self-help perspective that you can do to kind of improve the comp and improve the amount of the full price selling. So for example, is there anything that you can do to your core stores, maybe update them, or refresh them that could help drive the sales and profitability trends? Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Jay, good question. Always sensitize we're dealing in premium products with premium brands. So always sensitize to how we come to market brick-and-mortar and that includes from renovations up to technical advances that we provide customers with in terms of our connectivity, these Google programs and such. So yes, you're absolutely right. And we invest a big chunk of change in renovating and repositioning stores and we'll continue to do that at an aggressive pace. So we got to maintain competency in terms of how we go-to-market in the brick-and-mortar world. Make no mistake, it's 85% of what we do. Yes, the customer is engaged with us digitally to start with. Half of them come on to the site before they make purchase decisions, but still a big portion of them are going into the stores and we got to provide the right ambience and the right environment for them to shop, very conscious of that. Jay Daniel Sole Morgan Stanley, Research Division Got it. So when you're talking about maybe reducing CapEx, the customer facing stuff, you said, you're not -- does that kind mean stuff in the stores and the stuff you're talking about right now. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Precisely. That's it. Operator Your next question comes from the line of Chris Svezia from Susquehanna Financial. Christopher Svezia Susquehanna Financial Group, LLLP, Research Division So I guess, the first question just -- I going to ask this -- for you maybe Sam. Just when you think about fourth quarter, and the comp guidance that you provided, you're comping flat here. I know you got a big product launch coming here, Jordan 11 is coming up. But if you think about February, which is critical here, and it's the toughest comparison for you guys. I mean, how do you think in terms of the product pipeline and obviously that's becomes a little more basketball focused for the All-Stars, but how do you think about the confidence level to go up against that comp number in February? Just sort of your thoughts about that. Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director Yes. I'll tell you, again, tough for me to predict but certainly from a product perspective only when I think about last year's introduction into the marketplace, coupled with -- versus this year, I feel really great about this year's introductions. Having said that, the biggest, I guess, caveat I would put is how much of the non-Retro, non-signature products that we currently have and will have receipts on over the course of December and January, how much of that will resonate with our consumers better than or less than they did a year ago. So the highly coveted allocated stuff like KD and LeBron and Retro Jordans that are releasing into the marketplace, special products for All-Star weekend, stacked up against last year, I think it's really good. Christopher Svezia Susquehanna Financial Group, LLLP, Research Division Okay. And my second question is, again, I'm not going to beat this to death here, but just when you think about running and you look across the competitive environment and obviously, your expertise there, you held to a higher standard, but it seems like the competitors some key competitors are to a degree, outperforming a bit on the running segment, in terms of comp, and not having to be as aggressive on promotions. Do you feel like you guys are maybe stayed a little too long in certain categories, certain brands has it been. I'm just trying to -- do you see it also from a competitive perspective like everybody is doing this or is it just more Finish Line specific. Because it seems like some of your competition is doing at least a better job on the running side of business. I know it is a tough question, but I'm just curious. Samuel M. Sato CEO & Director No, it's okay. I'm not going to comment on our competitors. What I'll tell you is our focus has always been, again, around delivering the most relevant products in all categories to our consumers. We work hard especially on the running category as that's been our leadership position for many years and because of that, the consumer expects the newest, latest products in terms of both design and innovation to come from us. And when it slows or becomes a bit stale, we're the ones to feel it the most. At the same time, when new products like you saw 4 or 5 years ago when the running category from an innovation perspective really ramps up, we are the first and largest to reap the benefits of that. Operator And your last question comes from the line of Scott Krasik from Buckingham. Scott David Krasik The Buckingham Research Group Incorporated Quick one on the guidance. You're obviously in cost-cutting mode, so if your sales or your comp plan doesn't actually meet expectations this quarter, are you going to be nimble enough to cut expenses so that you can make the EPS, even if the comps are below plan? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO That's exactly what we're working on, Scott. So while we're taking actions, now planning actions, now for the nearer term, many of those actions are going to start as early as January. So we are going to offset as much of this the margin pressure that we're facing with expense reductions and deliver the EPS sales guidance we talked about. Scott David Krasik The Buckingham Research Group Incorporated Okay. And then were there any revision to the full year based on Macy's? Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO No. Macy's continues to point to the high end of the sales guidance range and that modestly profitable bottom-line. Scott David Krasik The Buckingham Research Group Incorporated Okay. And then just -- you keep talking about you got incremental leverage obviously as the sales grow at Macy's. So let's say, Macy's grows, without giving any guidance here, 10% or 15% next year and it's between $200 million and $250 million, not that $250 million to $350 million range, what would the profitability look like for that business then. Edward W. Wilhelm Executive VP & CFO It's growing from a slightly profitable business today to a low-single digit operating margin business as we get to the $250 million plus range, it will get to the mid-single digit profitability range and then as we drive towards the high end, that's when we start to drive the high-single digit operating margin. Glenn S. Lyon Chairman Thank you. Okay, so thanks, all, of you for joining us today. We are committed with every ounce of energy we have to get this business back on track. We've successfully done this before and I'm confident that this team is up to the task. We look forward to updating you on the progress and we'll talk to you in March again. In the meantime, I hope all of you have a happy, a healthy and safe holiday season. Thanks to all of you. Operator This concludes today's conference call. You may now disconnect.